Immune aspects of myositis

Myositis describes a heterogeneous group of disorders whose main pathologic feature is chronic inflammation of the affected muscles. The association of myositis with other autoimmune diseases, the response to corticosteroid and immunosuppressive therapy, the frequent occurrence of autoantibodies, and the presence of chronic inflammatory cells in the affected muscles of patients with myositis indicate that the myositis syndromes are autoimmune diseases. This review summarizes recent observations on the role of humoral and cellular mechanisms in myositis. During the past year, the most notable contributions included studies on the relationship among autoantibodies and various clinical and epidemiologic features of patients with myositis; further evidence for T-cell involvement in the pathogenesis of myositis; demonstration of amyloid proteins in muscle fibers of patients with inclusion body myositis; and a controlled trial of plasma exchange and leukapheresis in myositis.

The term myositisencompasses a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized clinically by proximal muscle weakness and histologically by chronic inflammation of the affected muscles with a variable degree of muscle-fiber necrosis and regeneration. In addition to muscle weakness, patients with myositis manifest a wide variety of clinical features that include myalgia, anhritis, rash, Raynaud's phenomenon, and pulmonary fibrosis [ ll.

On the basis of clinicopathologic characteristics, myositis is divided into six categories: polymyositis, dermatomyositis, myositis associated with malignancy. inclusion body myositis, myositis with other connective tissue disease, and childhood dermatomyositis or polymyositis. Despite the clinical distinctions and certain laboratory differences among the clinical categories of myositis, the common pathologic feature of these disorders is the presence of chronic inflammatory infiltrates in the affected muscles. This review focuses on recent progress in the role of humoral and cellular immunity in the pathogenesis of myositis.

Abnormalities of humoral immunity

Suggestions that myositis may be the result of disordered immune function have arisen because of association of myositis with other autoimmune diseases ( ie, systemic lupus erythematosus [SLE) and systemic scle-rosis) and because of the presence of several autoantibodies in the sera of patients with myositis [2.. -4 .. ). The autoantibodies in myositis can he separated into two classes (Table 1). The first class includes antibodies that are tissue specific. ie, those directed against muscle antigens. The second class includes antibodies that react with nuclear or cytoplasmic antigens of various tissues or organs.

With respect to the muscle-specific antibodies, early studies demonstrated the presence of antibodies directed against muscle proteins such as myosin and myoglobin. Subsequently, it was shown that these antibodies were not specific for myositis because they were also found in a wide variety of other diseases including muscular dystrophies, myasthenia gravis, and in noninflammatory neuromuscular diseases. The lack of disease specificity suggests that antibodies to muscle components could arise secondarily as a result of muscle injury. rather than as a cause.

The second class of autoantihodies that are directed against ubiquitous nuclear and cytoplasmic constituents have received gre:1ter attention because many of these antibodies are also found in other autoimmune diseases. In early studies, antinuclear antibodies (ANAs) were found in 2'i 0 1ii to 30% of patients with myositis. panicularly in patients with myositis in association with another connective tissue disease. With modern immunologic techniques such as immunohlotting and immunoprecipitation and the use of spe-Abbreviations ANA-antinuclear antibody; RNP-ribonucleoprotein; SLE-systemic lupus erythematosus.

© 1992 Current Science ISSN 1040-8711 809 

4-8

Myositis-associated antinuclear antibodies

Anti-PM-Sci (nuclear protein complex)

8

Anti-Mi-2 (nuclear protein) 5 Myositis-associated anticytoplasmic antibodies Anti-Jo-1 (histidyl-transfer RNA synthetase) 5-25 Anti-PL-7 (threonyl-transfer RNA synthetase)

4

Anti-PL-12 (alanyl-transfer RNA synthetase)

3

Other antisynthetases 2 Anti-signal recognition particle 3 cial tissue culture cell substrates, almost 90% of patients with myositis will he found to have an autoantibody directed against some nuclear or cytoplasmic component. Recent investigations have demonstrated that about 20% to 30% of patients with myositis have autoantibodies seen mainly in patients with myositis. Many of these myositis-associated autoantibodies tend to be directed against cytoplasmic ribonucleoproteins involved in protein synthesis. One group, the antibodies to aminoacyl-transfer RNA synthetases, includes autoantibodies directed at five different cytoplasmic enzymes, ie, histidyl-, threonyl-, alanyl-, and isoleucyl-, glycyl-transfer RNA synthetase. The most common antisynthetase antibody is the anti-histidyl-transfer RNA synthetase (anti-Jo-1) seen in 5% to 20% of patients with myositis.

Recently, another group of anticytoplasmic antibodies has been identified and includes autoantihodies that are directed at the signal recognition particle (anti-signal recognition particle antibodies). Several additional myositis-associated antibodies have been reported, but they are found in a small fraction of patients with myositis.

From the early studies, it became apparent that the presence of autoantibodies in the sera of patients with myositis seemed to correlate with a certain category of myositis or certain clinical manifestations of the disease. For example, ANAs were more common in myositis associated with another connective tissue disease than in inclusion body myositis or myositis associated with malignancy. Interstitial lung disease was more common and severe in patients with myositis with anti-Jo-I antibodies than in patients with myositis with anti-signal recognition particle antibodies.

The relationship among myositis-associated autoantibodies, immunogenetics, and a variety of clinical and epidemiologic features has been the subject of a study in 212 adult patients seen at the National Institutes of Health [5••]. Patients with antisynthetase autoantibodies had significantly more frequent arthritis, fever, interstitial lung disease, mechanic's hands rash, HLA-ORw52, and severe disease. Those with anti-Mi-2 antibodies had increased incidence of the V-sign rash (a rash in the V area of the neck), the shawl rash (a rash over the upper back and across the upper arms), cuticular overgrowth, DR7 and ORw53, and good response to therapy. The authors proposed that further subclassification of patients with myositis based on ANAs and anticytoplasmic autoantibodies may define more homogeneous groups of patients with myositis and lead to better understanding of the pathogenesis of this disease. Detection of some of these antibodies, however, requires specialized assays that are not available in most medical centers, posing a problem for large-scale studies.

In another study [6•), the same group of investigators examined the seasonal onset of myositis in 111 adult patients with polymyositis--dermatomyositis in relation to the presence of anti-Jo-I and anti-signal recognition particle antibodies. The patients were classified into three groups according to myositis-associated autoantibodies. In patients with anti-Jo-1 antibodies ( n = 31), the onset of muscle weakness began frequently between February and July, whereas in patients with anti-signal recognition particle antibodies, the onset of weakness began between September and February. Patients with polymyositis--dermatomyositis with neither autoantibodies demonstrated no seasonal pattern in the onset of weakness. When the patients were classified into the traditional clinical groups of polymyositis and dermatomyositis, regardless of the type of autoantibodies, they did not differ in seasonal pattern of onset of weakness. It was implied that there might be a seasonal environmental trigger for myositis, possihly a virus, and that patients with anti-Jo-I and anti-signal recognition particle autoantibodies may differ from one another with respect to etiology.

Hirakata et al. [7•

] compared the incidence and clinical correlations of myositis-associated antibodies found in Japanese patients with those in North American populations. Serum samples from 52 patients with polymyositis--dermatomyositis, 39 with myositis overlap with other connective-tissue disease, 126 with SLE, and 113 patients with systemic sclerosis were examined. As in North American patients, antibodies to aminoacyl-transfer RNA synthetases and to signal recognition particle were most common in patients with polymyositis--dermatomyositis, less frequent in patients with myositis-overlap syndromes, and absent in patients with SLE and systemic sclerosis. Also, the correlations of anti-aminoacyl-RNA synthetase antibodies to various clinical features of myositis in Japanese patients were similar to those in North Americans. For example, antibodies to various aminoacyl-transfer RNA synthetases correlated with both interstitial lung disease and polyarthritis. There was, however, a difference between Japanese and North American popula-

Functional abnormalities

tions in the occurrence of anti-PM-Sci antibodies (seen in patients with scleroderma and myositis), which were not detected in Japanese patients, and in anti-ku (seen in patients with scleroderma and myositis) and anti-U2 (seen in myositis-overlap syndromes) ribonucleoprotein (RNP) antibodies, which were increased in Japanese patients. It was suggested that these differences could reflect variation in environmental or genetic factors.

An increased frequency of ANA has previously been reported in first-degree relatives of patients with autoimmune diseases such as SLE and systemic sclerosis. Using indirect immunofluorescence on HEp-2 cells (a human epithelial tissue culture cell line), Valentini et al. [8] examined the presence of ANA in five spouses and 41 first-degree relatives of nine probands with polymyositis--<lermatomyositis and in 41 sex-and age-matched controls. ANAs were detected in 12 of the 41 first-degree relatives and in only two controls. ANA positivity was not correlated either to sex, age, or to household contact, suggesting a genetic rather than an environmental influence. The absence of disease in the seropositive relatives, on the other hand, suggests that although genetic factors may he responsible for the development of ANA in relatives of patients with polymyositis--<lermatomyositis, apparently other factors, ie, environmental or developmental, are also required for the expression of myositis.

A multicenter prospective study [9•) examined the diagnostic and prognostic value of autoantihodies including ANA, anti--<louble-stranded DNA, anti-Sm, anti-RNP, anti-Ro/SS-A, anti-La/SS-B, anti-Jo-1, anti-Scl-70, and anti-PM-1 in 410 patients with early rheumatic ing agents, perhaps viruses. They could also offer a means by which different subsets of patients would be defined and disease activity and outcome determined. Certainly, the presence of ANA or anticytoplasmic antibodies in the serum of a patient with muscle weakness provides diagnostic help by indicating the presence of autoimmune myositis rather than neuromuscular disease.

Cellular immunity in myositis

diseases Cless than a 1-year duration). Patients with polymyositis--<lermatomyositis had a 54% incidence of ANA, with speckled pattern seen in 12 of the 20 ANApositive patients ( n = 37). Only 2% of patients were anti-Jo-] positive, which is less than the 25% reported by other investigators. As in previous studies, ANA was present in the majority of patients with SLE (93%) and scleroderma (98%). The authors concluded that although ANA is very sensitive in patients with SLE and scleroderma even in early disease, it is not specific. In contrast, "specific" antibodies such as the anti-Jo-1 for polymyositis--<lermatomyositis and the Sci-70 in systemic sclerosis with myositis were rare.

The association of myositis with other autoimmune diseases and the frequent occurrence of autoantibodies support the notion that myositis is an autoimmune process. The role of autoantibodies in the pathogenesis of myositis, however, is not yet understood. It appears unlikely that these autoantihodies themselves cause disease. No cytotoxicity to muscle cells has been demonstrated, and antibodies in general cannot enter healthy cells. Nevertheless, the presence of autoantibodies in patients with myositis may suggest an abnormal immune response against unknown provok-Several lines of evidence support a role for cell-mediated immunity in patients with myositis (Table 2) [10.. ). The strongest indication that cellular immune mechanisms are involved in the pathogenesis of myositis has come from immunohistologic studies of the inflammatory infiltrates of affected muscles in patients with myositis. T cells and macrophages are the predominant cells of the inflammatory infiltrates in muscle, and their distribution. is reminiscent of cell-mediated reactions. Moreover, T cells bearing activating markers, such as major histocompatihility complex class II antigens, are in close proximity to muscle cells, indicating a causal relationship between T cells and muscle injury. Previous studies have shown that cytokines, such as interferon gamma, induce strong expression of class I and class II antigens on cultured muscle cells. The findings of these in vitro studies in conjunction with the demonstration of aberrant major histocompatibility complex class I and class II molecules in biopsy specimens of patients with polymyositis--<lermatomyositis suggest that cell-mediated immune mechanisms are actively involved in the pathogenesis of the disease. Furthermore, peripheral blood mononuclear cells of patients with polymyositis--<lermatomyositis proliferate on ex- posure to autologous or heterologous muscle extracts, and they are cytotoxic to cultured muscle cells.

Hohlfeld and Engel (11•] reevaluated the question of whether T cells from affected muscles of patients with myositis can kill aucologous muscle cells. The authors found that some of the expanded T-cell lines from three of six patients with polymyositis, one of four patients with inclusion body myositis, and one of five patients with dermatomyositis showed low but statistically significant cytotoxicity against autologous myotubes (6% to 27% specific 51Cr release; effector-target ratio, 20:1). These results support the hypothesis that T cells recognize autoantigen on muscle cells.

The questions regarding specific antigens against which the immune response is mounted and the mech-anisms whereby mononuclear cells accumulate in affected muscles remain unanswered. On a theoretical level, chemoattractants and cytokines mediate lymphocyte migration and localization to inflammatory sites.

Recent investigations have demonstrated that adhesion molecules also play a major role in the accumulation and homing of mononuclear cells in the inflammatory sites [12].

Based on these observations, Kalovidouris et al. 113.. )

examined the effect of human interferon gamma on T-cell adhesion to cultured muscle cells. Addition of recombinant interferon gamma to muscle cell cultures consistently enhanced (approximately four times) the adherence of T cells to muscle cells in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 1). By blocking monoclonal antibodies, we found chat the intercellular adhesion molecule 1 and its ligand, the lymphocyte function-associated antigen 1, were the major ligands for this adherence. These findings suggest that cytokines and adhesion molecules may play an important role in the accumulation of T cells in affected muscles. Understanding the molecular mechanisms mediating mononuclear cell accumulation in affected muscle of patients with myositis is likely co afford new insights into the pathogenesis of myositis.

Amyloid proteins and inclusion body myositis

Inclusion body myos1t1s is a disorder resembling polymyositis, hue distinctive because of certain clinicopachologic findings, which include insidious onset after 50 years of age, poor response to prednisone and immunosuppressive drugs, atrophic muscle fibers, and muscle fibers with characteristic rimmed vacuoles that contain cytoplasmic filamentous inclusions [14]. Clinically, its separation from other types of myositis, such as polymyositis, is difficult, and often a biopsy specimen from a patient with inclusion body myositis cannot he distinguished from that from a patient with polymyositis without electron microscopy. Moreover, the inclusions are present in a few fibers, and often, a first biopsy may not reveal any inclusions.

The uncertainties about the relationship of inclusion body myosicis co the other groups of myositis have recently been brought to light by the finding of amyloid proteins in muscle cells of patients with inclusion body myositis. In one study II 5.. 1, fresh-frozen sections of muscle biopsy specimens from 24 patients with inclusion body myositis stained with Congo red dye demonstrated intracellular green-birefringent deposits, indicating amyloid proteins. The deposits were restricted to vacuolated fibers and showed no relation co the inflammatory infiltrate. Control biopsy specimens from 32 patients with polymyositis-dermatomyositis and from patients with a variety of vacuolar myopathies were negative for amyloid deposits except for chose from two patients, one with hereditary vacuolar myopachy and the other with distal myopathy. The amyloid-like deposits in that study were not characterized chemically.

Further 

lmmunomodulatory treatments in myositis

Most patients with myositis can be treated with corticosteroids. The standard practice is to begin with 1 mg of prednisone per kilogram of body weight per day in divided dosages of 30 to 40 mg twice a day for approximately 6 to 8 weeks; the dose is then tapered over a period of 3 to 4 months to approximately 7 or 10 mg per day. Then, if there is no clinical improvement, ie, no increase in muscle strength, or if the patient is requiring higher doses of corticosteroids to suppress disease activity, an immunosuppressive agent-usually azathioprine or methotrexate-is added. When the patient has a poor response to corticosteroids or immunosuppressive agents, other alternatives that are either new or experimental could be considered (18•]. Indeed, the results of several uncontrolled trials have suggested that plasmapheresis and leukapheresis improve the clinical course of patients with myositis. The rationale for these treatments is that removal of plasma might remove from the blood the substance, possibly autoantibody, and removal of lymphocytes might remove the lymphocytes that cause the disease. The efficacy of plasmapheresis and leukapheresis was the subject of a recent randomized and blinded trial (19.. 1. In that study, 39 patients with polymyositis-<lermatomyositis were randomly assigned to receive plasma exchange, leukapheresis, or sham apheresis in a double-blind manner given as 12 treatments over a 1-month period.

The investigators found no benefit from plasmapheresis or leukapheresis compared with sham apheresis. In each of the three groups, only three of 13 patients had substantial improvement in muscle strength and functional capacity. An editorial on plasmapheresis in the treatment of myositis and SLE appears in the same issue as the published article (20•].

Intravenous immunoglobulin therapy is increasingly used in autoimmune diseases. Although the biologic effects of intravenous immunoglobulin in these diseases have not been elucidated, it is clear that the drug may influence the immune system in many ways [21•,22•].

Case reports and small series of patients in open trials [23,241 suggested that intravenous immunoglobulin therapy may have a beneficial effect on patients with myositis. A recent report (25] describes two patients with polymyositis resistant to corticosteroid and immunosuppressive therapy who were successfully treated with intravenous immunoglobulin (0.4 g/kg/d for 4 days). Further controlled trials are needed to substantiate the effectiveness of this therapy in patients with myositis. Investigation of the effect and mechanisms of action of intravenous immunoglobulin in patients with myositis could also provide additional insights into the pathogenesis of the myositis disorders.

References and recommended reading

Papers of particular interest, puhlished within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:

KAGEN LS: Polymyositis and dermatomyositis. In Arthritis a11d Allied CunditiollS, 11th ed. Edited by M •Carty DJ.

Philadelphia: Lea and Fehiger; 1989: 1092-1117.

2.

MILLER FW: Humoral immunity and immunogenetics in the .. idiopathic inflammatory myopathies. Curr Opin Rhe11mato/ 1991, 3:902-910. A detailed review of myositis-associated autoantibodies and their epidemiologic, clinical, prognostic, and immunogenetic ass,x-ialions.

3.

McCARTY GA: Autoantibodies in scleroderma and polymyosi-.. tis: an update. Semin Dermato/ 1991, 10:206--216.

A hrief review of the major autoantihody systems found in ser.1 of patients with sderoderma and polymyositb, with emphasis on their clinical, molecular, and pathogenetic significance.

4.

TARGOFF  1991, 18:1340-1343. This study examines the diagnostic and prognostic value of ANA in patienL with connective tissue diseases. The authors found that ANA had limited differential diagnostic value in patients with early disease. 10.

KAlOVIDOURJS AE: The role of cell-mediated immunity in .. polymyositis. Curr Opin Rheumatol 1991, 3:911-918. A review of the role of cell-mediated immune mechanisms in patients with myositis.

11.

HOHLFELD R, ENGEL AG: Coculture with autologous my-• otubes of cytotoxic T cells isolated from muscle in inflammatory myopathies. Ann Neural 1991, 29:498-507. This study showed that some of the expanded T-cell lines from pa• tients with myositis were cytotoxic to autologous myotuhes, suggesting that T cells may recognize an autoantigen on muscle cells. 12.

SPRINGER TA: Adhesion receptors of the immune system.

Nature 1990, 346:425-433 13. KAlOVIDOURIS AE, HORN CA, PLOTKIN Z: Recombinant hu-.. man interferon-gamma (IFN-y) enhances T cell adhesion to cultured human muscle cells. Arthritis Rheum 1991, 34:S147. This study demonstrated that recombinant interferon gamma enhanced the adherence of T cells to cultured muscle cells. The major ligands for this adherence were the JCAM-1 and LFA-1 molecules. 

Fig. 1 .1Fig. 1. Human interferon gamma increases the binding of T cells to cultured skeletal muscle cells. A, Four-day-old muscle cell culture containing only medium. B, Paired culture treated with interferon gamma (10 U/ml) showing four times as many T cells attached to muscle cell monolayers compared with the untreated culture (x 200, phase microscopy).

Table 1 .1Autoantibodies in myositisPrevalence,Specificity%Antimuscle (myosin, myoglobin) antibodies80-90Antinuclear antibodies25-70Anti-La/SS-B5-20Anti-Ro/SS-A10-15Antithyroglobulin6-10Rheumatoid factor

Early undifferenti- ated connective tissue disease. 11. The frequency of circulat- ing antinuclear antibodies in patients with early rheumatic diseasesWJLLLAMS HJ, SINGER JZ, STEEN VD, SCHLEGEL S, • ZIMINSKI C, ALARCON GS, LUGGEN ME, POUSSON RP, WILLKENS Rf, y ARBORO C, McDUFFIE FC, wARD JR:A detailed study of the relationship among autoantibodies, immuno-genetics, and a variety of clinical and epidemiologic features in alarge population of patients with myositis seen at the National Insti-tutes of Health.6.LEFF RL, BURGESS SH, MILLER FW, LOVE LL, TARGOFF IN,•DALAKAS MC, JOFFE MM, PLOTZ PH: Distinct seasonal pat-tems in the onset of adult idiopathic inflammatory myopa-thy in patients with anti-Jo-I and anti-signal recognition par-ticle autoantibodies. Arthritis Rheum 1991, 34:1391-13%.An analysis of the seasonal patterns in the onset of myositis withrespect to traditional subsetting and also serologic suhsetting of pa-tienL with adult-onset myositis.7.HIRAKATA M, MIMORI T, AKIZUKI M, CRAYT J, HARDIN JA,•HOMMA M: Autoantibodies to small nuclear and cytoplasmicribonucleoproteins in Japanese patients with inflammatorymuscle disease. Arthritis Rheum 1992, 35:449--456.Analysis of the profile and clinical significance of small nuclear andcytoplasmic autoantibodies in Japanese patients with myositis.8.VALENTINI G, IMPROTA RDG, RESSE M: Antinuclear antibod-ies in first-degree relatives of patients with polymyositis-der-matomyositis: analysis of the relationship with HLA haplo-types. Br J Rheumatol 1991, 30:429--432.9.CLEGG DO,IN: Polymyositis.lmm11no/ Ser 1991, 54:..201-246.A comprehensive review of the autoantihodies in patients withmyositis.5.LOVE LL, LEfF RL, FRASER DD, TARGOFF IN, DALAKAS M, PLOTZ..PH, MILLER FW: A new approach to the classification of id-iopathic inflammatory myopathy: myositis-specific autoanti-bodies define useful homogeneous patient groups. Medicine1991, 70:360-374.. J Rheumatol

body myositis allows its light-microscopic distinction from polymyositis.Neurology 1992, 42:460-461. The authors demonstrated immunochemical localization of ubiquitin in muscle biopsy specimens from 10 patients with inclusion body myositis. None of the 18 muscle biopsy control specimens, including normal biopsy specimens and those from five patients with polymyositis, contained the ubiquitin immunoreactive inclusions seen in patients with inclusion body myositis.LEITMAN  SF, CRONIN ME, HICKS JE, LEFF RL, FRASER DO, DALAKAS M, PLOTZ PH: Controlled trial of plasma exchange and leukapheresis in polymyositis and dermatomyositis. N Engl J Med 1992, 326:1380-1384. In this study, 39 patients with polymyositis-dermatomyositis were randomly assigned to receive plasma exchange, leukapheresis, or sham apheresis in a double-blind manner. The investigators found that plasmapheresis and leukapheresis were no more effective than was sham apheresis. 20. CAMPION EW: Desperate diseases and plasmapheresis [edi-• torial]. N Engl j Med 1992, 326:1425-1427. An excellent editorial on the value of plasmapheresis in patients with SLE and polymyositis. 21. KAVERJ SV, DIETRICH G, HUREZ V, KAZATCHKINE MD: Intra-• venous immunoglobulins (IVlg) in the treatment of autointmune diseases. Clin Exp lmmunol 1991, 86:192-198. A brief review of the current use of intravenous immunoglohulin therapy in patienL with autoimmune diseases, with a particular emphasis on the possible mechanisms of its action on pathologic autoimmune responses. 22. DWYER JM: Manipulating the immune system with immune • globulin. N Engl j Med 1992, 326:107-116. A detailed review of the mechanisms that may he responsible for the modification of immunologic reactions and the therapeutic henefiL of intravenous immunoglohulin therapy in patienL with hematologic and nonhematologic autoimmune diseases. 23. ROIFMAN CM, SCHAFFER FM, WACHSMUfH SH, MURPHY G, GELFAND EW: Reversal of chronic polymyositis following intravenous immune scrum globulin therapy. JAMA 1987, 258:513-515. 24. CHERIN P, HERSON S, WECHSLER B, PIETTE JC, BLETRY 0, COllLTEWER A, ZIZA JM, GOOF.AU P: Efficacy of intravenous gammaglobulin therapy in chronic refractory polymyositis and dermatomyositis: an open study with 20 adult patients. Am j Med 1991, 91:162-168. 25. JANN S, BERETIA S, MOGGIO M, ADABBATI L, PELLEGRINI G: High-dose intravenous human immunoglobulin in polymyositis resistant to treatment. J Neural Neurosurg Psychiatry 1992, 55:60-62. myositis stained with Congo red dye demonstrated amyloid deposiL in the vacuolated fibers characteristic of inclusion body myositis. Kalovidouris, MD, Indiana University School of Medicine at the Richard L. Roudebush Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 1481 West 10th Street, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.17.ASKANAS V, ENGEL WK, ALVAREZ RB: J>amyloid protein int••munoreactivity in muscle of patients with inclusion-bodymyositis. Lancet 1992, 339:360-361.Using a monoclonal antibody directed against -amyloid protein, theauthors demonstrated -amyloid protein immunoreactivity in vacuo-lated muscle fibers of muscle biopsy specimens from patients withinclusion body myositis.18.Onn1s CV: Therapy for myositis. Curr opin Rheumatol 1991,•3:919-924.A review of classic and new therapies for patients with myositis.14. 15. •• Muscle biopsy specimens from 24 patients with inclusion body LOTZ BP, ENGEL AG, NISHINO H, STEVENS JC, LITCHY WJ: Inclusion body myositis. Brain 1989, 112:727-747. MENDELL JR, SAHENK Z, GALES T, PAUL L: Amyloid filaments in inclusion body myositis. Arch Neural 1991, 48:1229-1234. ASKANAS V, SERDAROGLU P, ENGEL WK, ALVAREZ RB: Im-MILLER FW, 16. 19. Apostolos E.•munocytochemical localization of ubiquitin in inclusionHWESLEY R,

