Diabetic Kidney Disease– A clinical update from Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO)

Abstract

The incidence and prevalence of diabetes mellitus (DM) continue to grow dramatically throughout the world, due primarily to the increase in type 2 DM (T2DM). Although improvements in DM and hypertension management have reduced the proportion of diabetic individuals who develop chronic kidney disease (CKD) and progress to end-stage renal disease (ESRD), the sheer increase in people developing DM will have a major impact on dialysis and transplant needs. This KDIGO conference addressed a number of controversial areas in the management of DM patients with CKD, including aspects of screening for CKD with measurements of albuminuria and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR); defining treatment outcomes; glycemic management in both those developing CKD and those with ESRD; hypertension goals and management, including blockers of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system; and lipid management.

The incidence and prevalence of diabetes mellitus (DM) have grown significantly throughout the world, due primarily to the increase in type 2 DM (T2DM), which in turn is largely related to the increase in obesity.1 This increase in T2DM disproportionately affects less developed countries, which also have fewer resources to deal with such patients.1 The increase in the number of people developing diabetes will also have a major impact on dialysis and transplant needs. As such it is important to develop cost-effective strategies at every step: (1) prevention of obesity; (2) screening for and prevention of diabetes in an at-risk population; (3) glycemic control once diabetes develops; (4) blood pressure (BP) control once hypertension develops; (5) screening for diabetic chronic kidney disease (CKD); (6) use of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) inhibition/blockade in those with diabetic CKD; and (7) control of other cardiovascular (CV) risk factors such as management of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C).

The relationship of CKD to cardiovascular disease (CVD) remains complex. Increased urinary albumin excretion rates (AERs) and decreased glomerular filtration rate (GFR) are both associated with an increase in all-cause and CVD mortality independent of each other and of other CVD risk factors in general and high-risk populations.2–4 The relationship between the presence of microalbuminuria and CVD mortality in diabetic individuals has been known for over 25 years5 and the interrelationship between AER, GFR and CVD mortality has been well-studied in diabetic individuals.6, 7 However, treatments that affect progression of CKD may not always have the same effect on the development/progression of CVD. Similarly, there may be differences in how interventions affect urinary AER vs. GFR. In patients with diabetes, there appear to be differences in the rate of GFR decline that are related to the presence or absence of increased AER.7, 8

Studies in both type 1 DM (T1DM) and T2DM have shown that glycemic control can decrease the initial development of micro- and macroalbuminuria,9–12 but data documenting an effect on GFR are sparse.13–16 Recent data suggest that perhaps there should be different hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) targets for CKD and CVD, as HbA1c levels below 7% (53 mmol/mol) continue to show benefit in preventing the development of microalbuminuria17–19 but show no benefit17–19 and perhaps harm20 with respect to CVD. Although there may be only a minimal effect of lower HbA1c levels on CKD as it progresses towards ESRD, other complications of diabetes such as retinopathy and neuropathy may benefit from such control.

Similarly, the BP targets for CKD and CVD may be different. While it is recognized that BP control is very important in slowing the rate of fall of GFR,21 the optimal BP to benefit all outcomes is controversial. Similar to the effects of glycemic control, a systolic BP (SBP) lower than 120 mmHg may be of further benefit for CKD progression,22 but could be associated with worsened CVD outcomes.22–24

The role of RAAS blockade in the development and progression of diabetic CKD over and above BP control needs reevaluation. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE-Is) and angiotensin-receptor blockers (ARBs) are not able to prevent the development of microalbuminuria in normotensive individuals with either T1DM or T2DM25, 26 and their role in normotensive individuals with low levels of microalbuminuria is unclear. The relative benefits of ACE-Is vs. ARBs vs. direct renin inhibitors in T1DM and T2DM patients with hypertension and albuminuria remain to be determined. Similarly, the role of combinations of drugs acting in the RAAS remains controversial. Finally, whether RAAS blocking drugs have an effect over and above blood pressure reduction in decreasing the rate of CKD progression in those without increased AER is not clear.

Many other controversies exist in the management of diabetic CKD. Although statins likely decrease CVD in those with CKD prior to needing dialysis,27, 28 the proof that they are effective in patients on dialysis is lacking 29–31 Should statins be stopped when patients go on dialysis? Are there any efficacy data for other cholesterol-lowering medications in patients with diabetic CKD? Another controversial issue is the use of metformin to control hyperglycemia in patients with decreased GFR. Although lactic acidosis is a potential problem in such patients, the risk appears to be small.32–34 Whether the current guidelines are too strict deserves a reanalysis.

To address these and other issues, Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) held a Controversies Conference on Diabetic Kidney Disease on March 16–18th, 2012 in New Delhi, India. Drs. Carl Erik Mogensen and Mark Molitch co-chaired this conference with the goal to define the current state of knowledge in the management of diabetic kidney disease (DKD). Topic areas related to DKD included: 1) epidemiology, 2) albuminuria, 3) glycemic control, 4) RAAS blockade, 5) management of hypertension, and 6) role of statins.

Invited participants and speakers consisted of leading worldwide experts on these topic areas, including nephrologists and diabetologists, who gave the broadest views possible on the subject. Their task was to summarize the existing knowledge, develop recommendations on what can be done to optimize the prognosis of patients with DKD based on this knowledge, and to formulate and prioritize research questions. This position statement is the resultant output from the conference.

SCREENING AND EVALUATION OF DIABETIC KIDNEY DISEASE

The role of albuminuria

Testing for albuminuria – either for screening or for diagnosing – utilizes the same test for two purposes: to identify people at high risk of subsequent complications (including renal disease, CVD, and death), and to offer treatment. Treatment decisions may depend only on the presence or absence of microalbuminuria (defined either using albumin-to-creatinine ratio or a urinary AER) or on the degree of albuminuria. Microalbuminuria identifies diabetic individuals at higher risk of overt proteinuria and of ESRD35 relative to those with normoalbuminuria while acknowledging that albuminuria can regress.36 Currently, the magnitude of increase in risk of ESRD for patients with T1DM or T2DM and microalbuminuria is four to five-fold. Further reductions in CVD, a ‘competing’ cause of death, may translate to more patients with microalbuminuria living longer and developing ESRD. Microalbuminuria approximately doubles the risk of death from CVD and independently increases the chance that patients die earlier than they would in the absence of albuminuria.36 Albuminuria may reflect a more general damage to the vascular endothelium. When including albuminuria as a component of overall risk, one can calculate the risk of CVD and death in T2DM.37

Existing evidence supports therapies proven to reduce the incidence of CVD, namely BP-lowering drugs (notably those that inhibit the renin-angiotensin system) and statins. Angiotensin blockade lowers the risk of subsequent renal decline, though there is absence of such evidence in normoalbuminuric, normotensive patients. The beneficial effect of statins in prolonging survival is currently limited to patients without ESRD.38 With respect to the frequency of testing, the conference work group was aware that annual testing for albuminuria among normoalbuminuric patients has been recommended in diabetes by numerous bodies.39–43

The work group considered the following controversies related to testing for albuminuria:

The work group concluded that testing for albuminuria among people with diabetes identifies people at higher risk of subsequent complications and identifies people to whom to offer treatment. The work group also concluded that uncertainties remain about the frequency of testing and the role of ongoing periodic testing, particularly for patients in whom treatment options are few. Further, the cost effectiveness of testing for albuminuria likely varies across populations defined by different clinical or geographical characteristics. Uncertainty also remains regarding what constitutes a clinically significant change in albuminuria, which complicates how meaningful outcomes are defined in clinical trials.

Is albuminuria an acceptable surrogate marker for diabetic CKD?

Albuminuria reflects glomerulopathy along with measures of glomerular filtration. People with diabetes may develop only albuminuria, only decreased glomerular filtration, or both.8, 46, 47 Independent of albuminuria and diabetes, measures of glomerular filtration predict CKD.48 Both measures independently increase the risk of mortality.49, 50 Unlike for albuminuria, the relationship between glomerular filtration and mortality is ‘U’ shaped, reflecting an increased risk of death associated with hyperfiltration.51 CKD, as estimated by eGFR, increases the risk of death equivalent that of having existing CVD.50

Results of systematic reviews and process-driven guidelines advocate screening for reduced glomerular filtration in all people with diabetes regardless of concurrent risk factors,40–42 generally using an equation which incorporates serum creatinine. Although serum cystatin C may better predict death and progression to kidney failure than does GFR estimated from creatinine-based equations,52 the modest increase in accuracy has not been shown to merit the increased cost. Furthermore cystatin C may reflect non-GFR determinants of these health outcomes, as it is known that cystatin C is increased in smoking and other states that increase the risk of CVD.53 Currently, testing for serum cystatin C is unlikely to have a significant role in clinical practice. The work group acknowledged that other markers of renal tubular injury, such as NGAL (neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin) and KIM-1 (kidney injury molecule-1) may identify patients without other markers of nephropathy (e.g. albuminuria), but that these have not been sufficiently tested to incorporate into clinical practice. Studies of markers of renal function should be held to the same reporting recommendations as those developed for tumor markers.54

The work group concluded that albuminuria both reflects and results from nephropathy. Measures of reduced eGFR both identify CKD in people without albuminuria and those at increased risk of cardiorenal complications independent of albuminuria.

GLYCEMIC CONTROL

Glycemic control to minimize DKD

The work group evaluated the role of glycemic control in preventing initiation and slowing progression of DKD in various clinical settings, and focused on management issues for which the evidence is conflicting, incomplete, or unavailable.

Lowering glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) to about 7% (53 mmol/mol) reduces the development of the microvascular complications of T1DM and T2DM.39, 55 More intensive glycemic control further reduces the development of these complications but the added benefit is accompanied by a substantial increase in the risk of severe hypoglycemia and a potential increase in all-cause mortality.17–19 The evidence for a beneficial effect of glycemic control on DKD is based almost exclusively on prevention of microalbuminuria and reduction of progression to macroalbuminuria. Evidence for an effect on other intermediate DKD outcomes, such as doubling of the serum creatinine concentration or decline in eGFR, is limited,10, 56 and there is no direct evidence that intensive glycemic control reduces the frequency of ESRD.

Intensive glycemic control has less impact on CVD than on the microvascular complications of diabetes, unless treatment is initiated soon after the diagnosis of diabetes.57, 58 Among patients with diabetes of longer duration, intensive glycemic control is not associated with significant reductions in CVD outcomes,17–19 except among those without known CVD at baseline.59

Target HbA1c level may need to be modified in patients with more advanced DKD because the risk of severe hypoglycemia and death increase with declining kidney function. There are few data on the relationship between HbA1c levels and these health outcomes in this subpopulation, and there are no prospective randomized clinical trials (RCTs) to identify the optimum level of glycemic control among patients with diabetes and eGFR <60 ml/min/1.73 m2. An observational study of non-dialyzing CKD patients with diabetes and eGFR <60 ml/min/1.73 m2 found a U-shaped relationship between HbA1c level and mortality, with HbA1c levels above 9% (75 mmol/mol) and below 6.5% (48 mmol/mol) associated with increased mortality.60 A similar U-shaped relationship was also reported in patients with diabetes receiving maintenance hemodialysis61, 62 or peritoneal dialysis.63 Among dialysis patients, the mortality risk associated with a given HbA1c level was determined in part by nutritional status,61–63 reflecting a need to individualize the intensity of glycemic control according to the overall health of the patient.

The use of immunosuppressive medicines in patients with diabetes who receive kidney transplants can also affect glycemic control, and they may also lead to new-onset diabetes after transplantation (NODAT).64 Although the presence of diabetes post-transplantation is associated with increased morbidity and mortality attributable largely to CVD, there are no prospective RCTs to define the optimum level of glycemic control in this patient group. However, pre-transplant HbA1c ≥8% (64 mmol/mol) is associated with higher all-cause and CVD mortality post-transplantation;65 therefore, management of glycemia prior to kidney transplant is also important.

In addition to identifying appropriate HbA1c targets in various subgroups of diabetic patients, simply achieving glycemic control may present a formidable challenge in some patient groups. The Treatment Options for Type 2 Diabetes in Adolescents and Youth (TODAY) study illustrates the challenges faced in effectively managing glycemic control in the rapidly growing population of youth with T2DM.66

The work group considered the following controversies related to glycemic control:

The work group concluded that multiple factors, including age, body weight, duration of diabetes, severity of CKD, and other comorbidities should be considered when determining the risks and benefits of intensive glycemic control. The work group noted that the risk of severe hypoglycemia increases with advancing CKD, and ameliorating this risk may require modifying both the treatment approach and the target HbA1c, or perhaps other measures of glycemic control that more accurately reflects glycemic control in this patient population such as glycated albumin. Few data are available to guide the management of glycemic control in patients with advanced CKD, and the shortage of data is particularly acute in kidney transplant recipients who receive immunosuppressive therapy that further intensifies the challenges of glycemic control. Accordingly, the work group proposed a series of research recommendations to address these gaps in knowledge. Among the recommendations are those designed to expand our knowledge of CKD in young people with T2DM who are expected to have an increasing burden of CKD in the future. Little is known about the course of CKD in these patients or their response to therapy.

Specific interventions

Use of metformin in DKD

The work group evaluated the use of metformin in the management of patients with diabetes in the setting of CKD, focusing in particular on settings in which current FDA guidelines advise against its use.

Lactic acidosis is a rare but serious side effect of metformin that can occur when metformin accumulates to toxic levels. The mean plasma elimination half-life of metformin after oral administration is 4.0 to 8.7 hours, and since it is cleared almost exclusively by the kidneys, its elimination is prolonged in persons with CKD.67 Accordingly, the use of metformin in CKD is restricted by FDA guidelines, which specify that it should not be used in men with a serum creatinine concentration ≥1.5 mg/dl (133 μmol/l) or in women with a concentration ≥1.4 mg/dl (124 μmol/l). Restrictions based on eGFR may be more clinically useful, however, since serum creatinine concentration may reflect factors such as age, weight, or race that are unrelated to the level of metformin clearance. Much of the concern about use of metformin in patients with diabetes and CKD is theoretical and not supported by evidence from clinical practice.32, 33 A Cochrane review68 that pooled data from 347 comparative trials and cohort studies found no cases of lactic acidosis; and nearly half of the studies included patients with CKD. Another review concluded, based on the available evidence, that metformin use should not be restricted at eGFR ≥45 ml/min/1.73m2, but its use should be re-evaluated when eGFR <45 ml/min/1.73m2 and stopped when eGFR <30 ml/min/1.73m2;69 this approach was adopted by the British National Formulary,70 the Japanese Society of Nephrology,71 and KDIGO.72

The work group reviewed the evidence at what level of kidney function should treatment with metformin be stopped and concluded that there was little evidence to support the relationship between metformin use and development of lactic acidosis in patients with CKD. Nevertheless, the occurrence of lactic acidosis is more frequent than previously thought. The major precipitating factor for lactic acidosis in persons receiving metformin is an abrupt loss of tubular secretion. Such a loss does not occur in stable CKD, but is a characteristic feature of acute kidney injury or rapid volume depletion associated with an intercurrent illness. Hence, patients with CKD should be advised on safety issues related to metformin so they are alert to the potential side effects and they should be provided with written instructions on when to withhold metformin if they experience intercurrent illness that could lead to rapid volume depletion. In addition, the work group concluded that the current FDA guidelines governing the use of metformin should be changed. The available evidence suggests that the dose of metformin should be reduced to a maximum of 1000 mg per day when the eGFR reaches 45 ml/min/1.73m2, and should generally be discontinued when the eGFR reaches 30 ml/min/1.73m2. The use of metformin may be appropriate in patients with even more advanced CKD (eGFR 15–29 ml/min/1.73 m2) if the kidney disease is stable and if alternative treatments to manage glycemia are unavailable or produce significant side effects. The work group proposed that pharmacokinetic studies should be performed in patients with diabetes and CKD to provide the evidence to support the proposed change in usage.

Role of pancreas or islet cell transplants

The work group evaluated the impact of pancreas or islet cell transplantation on the risk of CKD in patients with diabetes.

Progressive kidney damage is a significant contributor to ESRD in transplant recipients receiving liver, heart, lung, heart-lung, and intestinal transplants, with up to 21% of recipients developing ESRD within five years.73 Immunosuppressive therapy, particularly with calcineurin inhibitors appears to be largely responsible for this transplant-associated nephrotoxicity, but other risk factors, including age, sex, the presence of post-operative acute renal failure, and diabetes may also be involved.73 These findings suggest that recipients of whole pancreas or islet cell transplants may have potential long-term risks related to transplantation, despite the benefits of improved glycemic control. Indeed, survival among isolated pancreas transplant recipients is significantly worse than in similar patients awaiting a pancreas transplant who are receiving conventional glycemic therapy.74 Moreover, pancreas transplantation has been linked to an increased risk of kidney failure,75, 76 despite a report suggesting that diabetic glomerulosclerosis may be reversed in native kidneys following pancreas transplantation.77 The presence of CKD prior to transplant may further increase the risk of nephrotoxicity.75 The choice of calcineurin inhibitor was thought to influence the degree of nephrotoxicity in native kidneys of pancreas transplant recipients, but a recent study suggests that the nephrotoxic potential of tacrolimus and cyclosporine are equivalent, as reflected by similarities in GFR decline and the increase in interstitial fractional volume, tubular atrophy, and percent of globally sclerotic glomeruli.78 Together, these findings suggest that efforts to ameliorate the complications of diabetes through aggressive management of glycemic control with pancreas or islet cell transplantation may actually increase the risk of CKD in some patients. As such, is pancreas or islet cell transplantation nephrotoxic in patients with diabetes?

The work group concluded that progressive kidney damage is a consequence of pancreas or islet cell transplantation, and that the level of GFR should be considered in the selection of transplant recipients because of the increased risk of progressive kidney disease in those with CKD. The work group also recommended that for recipients with eGFR <60 ml/min/1.73m2, close monitoring of kidney function is required.

THERAPEUTIC MANAGEMENT

Lipid management

The work group evaluated the role of lipid lowering in preventing initiation of atherosclerotic disease and slowing progression of DKD. Several trials and post hoc analyses examining lipid-lowering therapies and clinical outcomes in CKD have been published in the past few years. Although these trials were not exclusively focused on atherosclerotic disease in persons with diabetes mellitus or DKD, they always had significant numbers of diabetes mellitus patients included in the trials. The work group mainly focused on RCTs and post hoc analysis of large statin trials with respect to DKD.

Although several different medications lower LDL-C, only regimens including a statin (including statin/ezetimibe) have convincingly reduced the risk of adverse CV events in CKD populations. At the time this work group discussed specific recommendations, two systematic reviews were published summarizing the studies that examined the effects of lipid-lowering treatment on CV and kidney outcomes and adverse events in adults and children with CKD.38, 79

LDL-C is strongly and independently associated with risk of atherosclerotic events in the general population.80 The relative risk reduction associated with statin use is relatively constant across a broad range of baseline LDL-C levels, suggesting that absolute benefit from statin treatment is proportional to baseline coronary risk rather than baseline LDL-C. Similarly, meta-analysis among people with diabetes on statin therapy revealed that the beneficial effects of statin therapy were similar irrespective of whether there was a prior history of vascular disease and other baseline characteristics.81 A 9% proportional reduction in all-cause mortality per mmol/l reduction in LDL-C (rate ratio 0.91; 99% CI 0.82–1.01; p=0.02) was paralleled by a significant reduction in vascular mortality (0.87; 0.76–1.00; p=0.008). There was a significant 21% proportional reduction in major vascular events per mmol/l reduction in LDL-C in people with diabetes (0.79; 0.72–0.86; p<0.0001). In diabetic participants there were reductions in myocardial infarction or coronary death (0.78; 0.69–0.87; p<0.0001), coronary revascularization (0.75; 0.64–0.88; p<0.0001), and stroke (0.79; 0.67–0.93; p=0.0002). Based on this existing knowledge from the general population the work group only focused on the use of statins (with or without ezetimibe) in people with DKD and at risk of future CV events.

Non-dialysis patients

Most patients with DKD and GFR >60 ml/min/1.73 m2 have albuminuria but many such patients would have been included but not recognized in randomized trials of statins done in the general population. Post-hoc analysis extracted such patients by eGFR. Data from CARDS (Collaborative Atorvastatin Diabetes Study) and CARE (Cholesterol and Recurrent Events) trials found significant reductions in CV events but did not detect an interaction between the presence of albuminuria and the effect of statin treatment suggesting that the benefit of statins is similar in people with and without albuminuria 82, 83

Data on the effects of statins and statin/ezetimibe combination in adults with CKD and eGFR <60 ml/min/1.73 m2 non-dialysis patients are available from The Study of Heart and Renal Protection (SHARP) trial which included 9270 participants.29 Thirty-three percent of participants (n=3023) were receiving dialysis at randomization and 23% (n=2094) had diabetes. Statin plus ezetimibe therapy led to a significant 17% relative risk reduction of the primary outcome of major atherosclerotic events (coronary death, MI, non-hemorrhagic stroke, or any revascularization) compared with placebo (HR 0.83, 95% CI 0.74–0.94). Among the 6247 patients with CKD (mean eGFR of 27 ml/min/1.73m2) treatment with simvastatin plus ezetimibe did not reduce the risk of progression to ESRD. Other data are supported by post hoc analyses of randomized trials of statin vs. placebo that focus on the subset of participants with DKD and CKD at baseline. In general, these analyses suggest that statins reduce the relative risk of CV events to a similar extent among patients with and without DKD – but that the absolute benefit of treatment is larger in diabetic patients due to their higher baseline risk.38 However, most of the participants with DKD in these analyses had eGFR 45–59.9 ml/min/1.73m2 and very few had eGFR <30 ml/min/1.73m2 (TNT - Treating to New Targets, ALLIANCE - Aggressive Lipid Lowering Initiation Abates New Cardiac Events, PREVEND IT - Prevention of REnal and Vascular ENdstage Disease Intervention Trial, PPP - Pravastatin Pooling Project).38, 79, 84

Dialysis patients

There are three large-scale RCTs of statin treatment that enrolled dialysis patients. The 4D Study (Die Deutsche Diabetes Dialyse Studie) demonstrated a 8% relative risk reduction (95% CI 0.77–1.10; p=0.37) of the primary endpoint in 1255 T2DM patients on dialysis but combined cardiac events (secondary endpoints) were reduced by 18% (95% CI 0.68–0.99; p=0.03).31 The AURORA Study (A study to evaluate the Use of Rosuvastatin in subjects On Regular Dialysis: an Assessment of survival and cardiovascular events) also did not show a reduction in the risk of individual components of the primary endpoint (HR 0.96; 95% CI 0.86–1.07, p=0.51).30 In contrast, a post-hoc analysis of AURORA among the 731 patients with T2DM found that rosuvastatin reduced the risk of fatal and nonfatal cardiac events significantly.85 In the SHARP trial combination treatment did not significantly reduce the risk of the primary outcome in the subgroup of over 3000 patients treated with dialysis at baseline. The smaller reduction of endpoints in the SHARP trial could be due to lower compliance to study drug in the subgroup of dialysis patients. Dialysis patients showed on average a 23 mg/dl (0.60 mmol/l) LDL-C reduction in comparison to the non-dialysis CKD group which had a 37 mg/dl (0.96 mmol/l) LDL-C decrease.

When findings from SHARP, 4D and AURORA are considered together, the clinical benefit of statins (alone or in combination with ezetimibe) in prevalent dialysis patients is uncertain.38

Guidelines for the general population recommend that (among patients receiving statin treatment) the dose of statin is titrated to achieve the target level of LDL-C, which in turn is determined by each patient’s presumed coronary risk.85 Higher statin doses produce greater clinical benefits, but at the expense of an increased risk of adverse events. DKD patients are at high risk of medication-related adverse events and reduced doses of statins are generally recommended. The work group suggests that prescription of statins in people with DKD with eGFR <60 ml/min/1.73 m2 should be based on regimens and doses that have been shown to be beneficial in randomized trials done specifically in this population. The doses tested were simvastatin/ezetimibe 20/10 mg/d in non-dialysis patients, atorvastatin 20 mg/d, rosuvastatin 10 mg/d, simvastin/ezetimibe 20/10 mg/d in dialysis patients as well as fluvastatin 80 mg/d in patients after kidney transplantation. Given the potential for toxicity with higher doses of statins and the relative lack of safety data, a definite target LDL-C is not recommended in DKD patients. There is a lack of studies designed to decide definite target LDL-C levels in such patients. Furthermore, this approach of using maximally tolerated statins rather than targeting specific LDL-C levels has recently been put forward for all patients at risk for CVD by the American Heart Association and the American College of Cardiology.86 Patients with eGFR >60 ml/min/1.73 m2 should be considered as general population patients. This approach is consistent with the recently published KDIGO guideline on lipid management in CKD.87

The work group considered the following controversies related to lipid management:

The work group concluded that statins lower mortality and CV events in persons with early DKD and have little or no effect in persons on dialysis. Thus the work group felt that treatment effects differ depending on severity of DKD. Patients with DKD on dialysis should not be initiated on statin or statin/ezetimibe treatment, given the lack of evidence that such treatment is beneficial. However, statin or statin/ezetimibe treatment should not necessarily be discontinued when dialysis treatment is initiated. The work group noted that few data are available to guide the management of dyslipidemia in kidney transplant recipients and based its recommendation mainly on the ALERT trial and its post-hoc analysis.88 It was felt that statin therapy has uncertain effects in kidney transplant recipients but treatment may be warranted if patients placed relatively high value on a small absolute reduction in the risk of CV events, and relatively less value on the risks of polypharmacy and drug toxicity. Accordingly, the work group proposed a series of research recommendations to address these gaps in knowledge. Among the recommendations are those designed to expand our knowledge on whether lipid-lowering is safe and effective in patients with DKD.

BP management

The work group evaluated the controversies around management of BP in patients with CKD and diabetes. Two guideline groups had recently discussed or updated previous guidelines for the treatment of patients with diabetes.39, 89, 90 Our work group focused on some of the issues that were part of these guideline discussions.

Diabetes is a disease that affects multiple organ systems. The risk factors are multifactorial, thus standard practice guidelines advise us to use multiple strategies to prevent or halt disease progression, such as lifestyle changes (including physical activities, dietary measures and smoking cessation) and pharmacological interventions. With these strategies we aim to manage: glucose, BP, lipids, body weight, urine albumin, etc. Control of BP is considered one of the key factors in slowing or even halting progressive renal function loss, as well as CV morbidity and mortality in diabetes.

Although it is well known that we should control BP in diabetes, many issues about the best way to ‘apply’ this treatment are still debated. We will focus on the following: first, what is the optimal BP target level? And second, which drugs should be chosen, and what should be the appropriate dietary sodium intake?

Optimal BP level

Recent guidelines suggest that patients with diabetes deserve special attention and a lower BP target than patients without diabetes, the recommended goal being 130/80 mmHg. The work group recognized that most clinical trials in diabetic patients with CKD show that this is not only a goal that is hard to achieve, but that there is also a question whether such low BPs are actually beneficial.91 Surprisingly, both KDOQI92 and KDIGO89 still support this low BP target for patients with DM and CKD (albeit with weak evidence levels). The only new trial on this issue is the SPRINT trial,93 examining the effect of the ambitious low target of 120 mmHg vs 140 mmHg, although this trial is not specifically aimed at patients with diabetes. There are no trials specifically studying an optimal BP target on renal outcomes. This could be of importance since decrease in renal function is associated with increased CV risk.

Drug choice

The use of antihypertensive drugs that intervene in the RAAS is preferred in patients with diabetes and CKD since these drugs show CV and renal protection beyond BP control compared to other antihypertensive drug classes. ACE-Is and ARBs are the drugs of choice since CV protection has been demonstrated for ARBs94–96 and ACE-Is for patients with T2DM even without CKD.97, 98 No studies in patients with diabetes have directly compared ACE-I vs. ARB therapy. This has been studied in non-diabetic disease99 showing no difference between these two mechanisms of blocking the RAAS. For mineralocorticoid-receptor blockers, CV protection was shown in a non-diabetes study,100 and no renal outcome studies are available. For direct renin inhibitors (DRIs), no CV or renal outcome studies have been performed.

Studies of combination therapies of RAAS blocking agents to date have been unsuccessful and such treatment could even be harmful. ONTARGET, although not specifically designed to look at diabetes, showed no clear benefit of combining ACE-I and ARB for either CV or renal outcome.101, 102 Recently, ALTITUDE showed that a combination of either ACE-I or ARB with a DRI in diabetes did not show any appreciable renal or CV protection, and may in fact be harmful.103 Finally, one trial (VA NEPHRON D) looking at combining ACE-I and ARB was prematurely stopped due to safety concerns.104 Despite improvements in surrogate parameters such as BP and albuminuria from dual RAAS therapies shown in some studies, VA NEPHRON-D demonstrated that combined angiotensin inhibition resulted in increased risk for hyperkalemia and acute kidney injury and provided no overall clinical benefit.105

Treating early CKD

Several trials have shown that RAAS blockade is not only effective in late stage renal disease in diabetes, but also in early CKD. The IRMA-2, INNOVATION, BENEDICT and ROADMAP studies showed that RAAS blockade can prevent transition from micro- to macroalbuminuria as well as from normo- to microalbuminuria in hypertensive diabetic patients.106–109 Whether this observation can be translated to normotensive individuals remains questionable since the DIRECT study did not show a clear benefit of RAAS intervention in normotensive T1DM or T2DM on transition from normo- to microalbuminuria (though the study was not powered for a renal outcome).25 Both KDIGO and the updated KDOQI guidelines thus suggest an ARB or ACE-I in normotensive diabetic patients with albuminuria >30 mg/day.39, 89, 90

Sodium restriction

The KDIGO guideline recommends lowering salt intake to <90 mmol (<2 g) per day of sodium (5 gram of sodium chloride), unless contraindicated. This lifestyle modification is meant to lower BP and improve CV and other outcomes. The work group noticed that there is a high level of evidence for high dietary sodium intake to be associated with many adverse outcomes. However, two recent publications fueled a debate whether this is true in diabetes.110, 111 The impact of these studies has to be further evaluated.

The work group established that sodium restriction may also influence the effect of drugs such as RAAS blockers on surrogate markers such as BP and albuminuria, and low sodium intake enhances the antihypertensive and antialbuminuric effects of ACE-I/ARB. Recently, post hoc analysis of a non-diabetic112 and two diabetic studies113 showed that lower sodium intake improves the renal protective effect of RAAS blockade compared to higher sodium intake.

CONCLUSIONS

Although we have gained a great deal of knowledge on how to diagnose and manage patients with DKD, there are still a large number of areas that need clarification (Table 1). Although increased urinary albumin levels are markers of both DKD and CVD, the frequency of screening for it in the context of other CVD and CKD risk factors remains uncertain. The relationship of albuminuria to GFR remains an interesting one and how various factors such as glycemic and BP control and RAS blocker use affect them are research questions that remain to be investigated. Additional questions include the roles of glycemic and BP control on the progression of DKD as its severity increases. There is a paucity of knowledge regarding the benefits of glycemic control in dialysis and transplant patients and even how it should be assessed. Controlled clinical trials on the best ways to manage hyperglycemia in the patient with GFR <30 ml/min/1.73 m2 or on dialysis are needed. Of specific interest is a need to reassess the safety and efficacy of metformin in patients with GFR <60 ml/min/1.73 m2 and a careful assessment of the effects of mTOR inhibitors and calcineurin inhibitors on kidney function in patients receiving islet cell and pancreas transplants. The efficacy of LDL-C reduction by statins has been well assessed in patients with all levels of DKD with the surprising, but reproducible finding of lack of efficacy in dialysis patients. However, there is a need to identify and obtain data on possible subgroups that might benefit most from lipid-lowering treatments, including those who have had kidney transplants. BP control remains a very important area but controversy exists as to the optimal BP to be achieved in those with DKD from both renal and CV outcome perspectives. Although RAAS blockers remain the cornerstone of therapy, how to manage patients who do not respond to them remains an issue. Combination RAAS blockade has not lived up to its promise, especially the combination of direct renin inhibitors and ACE-Is or ARBs. How these drugs interact with sodium balance is also an interesting area that needs further exploration.

As this conference clearly demonstrated, the goal of improving outcomes related to DKD involves a coordinated and multipronged approach to tackle its comorbidities (Figure 1). The optimal management of DKD has proved challenging but we have made great strides, with the number of patients developing ESRD per 100,000 patients with DM expected to decline considerably over the next decade. New drugs continue to be developed with novel mechanisms of action so that a continued exploration of the basic pathophysiology of DKD becomes ever more important. It may well be that some subgroups of patients respond better to one drug than another and better methods of identifying such subgroups will be of clinical benefit and provide us with a better understanding of the pathophysiology.

Figure 1

Approaches to improving outcomes related to diabetic kidney disease.

The best approach to prevent diabetic kidney disease is to prevent the diabetes itself. However, once diabetes occurs glycemic control may prevent/delay the development of diabetic kidney disease. In those patient who develop diabetic kidney disease, glycemic control, blood pressure control, and RAAS inhibition are all important in delaying/decreasing progression to ESRD and glycemic control, blood pressure control, and lipid management are all important in delaying/decreasing the development of CVD. CVD, cardiovascular disease; ESRD, end-stage renal disease; RAAS, renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. White arrows denote potential preventive measures.

