Racial and ethnic differences in pharmacotherapy to prevent coronary artery disease and thrombotic events
Abstract

Awareness of racial/ethnic disparities represents a key challenge for healthcare systems that attempt to provide effective healthcare and to reduce existing inequalities in the use of and adherence to guideline-recommended cardiovascular drugs to improve clinical outcomes for cardiovascular disease (CVD). In this review, we describe important racial/ethnic differences between and within ethnic groups in the prevalence, risk factors, haemostatic factors, anti-inflammatory and endothelial markers, recurrence, and outcomes of CVD.

We discuss important differences in the selection, doses, and response [efficacy and adverse drug reactions (ADRs)] in ethnically diverse patients treated with antithrombotics or lipid-lowering drugs. Differences in drug response are mainly related to racial/ethnic differences in the frequency of polymorphisms in genes encoding drug-metabolizing enzymes (DMEs) and drug transporters. These polymorphisms markedly influence the pharmacokinetics, dose requirements, and safety of warfarin, clopidogrel, and statins. This review aims to support a better understanding of the genetic differences between and among populations to identify patients who may experience an ADR or a lack of drug response, thus optimizing therapy and improving outcomes. The greater the understanding of the differences in the genetic variants of DMEs and transporters that determine the differences in the exposure, efficacy, and safety of cardiovascular drugs between races/ethnicities, the greater the probability that personalized medicine will become a reality.

Introduction

The burden of cardiovascular disease (CVD) continues to increase globally.1 It remains the leading cause of death and a major contributor to disability in virtually all ethnic groups. Epidemiological studies have demonstrated marked variations in the prevalence and natural history, risk factors (age, sex, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, obesity, dyslipidaemia, physical inactivity, and smoking), and outcomes of CVD between different races and ethnicities and within racial/ethnic groups.1 Although race and ethnicity are terms that are frequently used interchangeably, each term denotes a different attribute. Race refers to a person's physical traits, whereas ethnicity refers to a person's racial ancestry plus genetic and cultural differences (e.g. language, history, traditions, and beliefs).2 Furthermore, the efficacy and safety of cardiovascular drugs may differ between ethnicities, leading to geographical differences in the doses of approved drugs, drugs of choice, and drug labels.2,3

The precision medicine approach to CVD prophylaxis and treatment considers individual gene variability, drug pharmacokinetics (drug concentration over time), pharmacodynamics (relationship between drug concentration at the site of action and effect), demographic and environmental data (e.g. diet, age, lifestyle, exposure to drugs and toxins, and socioeconomic factors), and risk profiles with the aim of maximizing efficacy while minimizing or avoiding adverse drug reactions (ADRs).2,3 Interestingly, many differences in drug pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics are driven by genetic variations that determine the expression and/or functional activity of drug-metabolizing enzymes (DMEs), transporters, and/or targets (receptors, enzymes, ion channels, and proteins involved in signal transduction).4 Precision medicine has focused on cytochrome P450 isoforms (CYP2D6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, and CYP3A4), which are responsible for the biotransformation of approximately 70% of clinically prescribed cardiovascular drugs. Multiallelic genetic polymorphisms in DMEs, which differ markedly in frequency between different ethnicities and regions, represent a major source of variability in drug pharmacokinetics and lead to distinct phenotypes termed as normal, poor [two loss-of-function (LoF) alleles], intermediate (one LoF allele), extensive, and ultrarapid (duplication or amplification of an active gene) metabolizers.4 Awareness of variations in the frequency of DME-related genetic polymorphisms is important for identifying differences in drug response (excessive or subtherapeutic drug exposure leading to potential ADRs or lack of response, respectively), optimizing drug selection and dosing, and reducing disparities in the prophylaxis and treatment of CVD between different racial/ethnic groups.4

In this review, we describe important racial/ethnic differences in (a) the prevalence, risk factors, and outcomes of CVD (Table 1) and (b) efficacy, dose requirements, adherence, and/or ADRs of drugs used for the treatment of dyslipidaemia and thromboembolic events (Tables 2–5), which in many cases are related to differences in allelic variations in genes encoding DMEs (CYP2C9, CYP2C19, and VKORC1) and transporters (ABCG2 and VKORC1) among major ethnic groups (Table 6). Oral antithrombotic therapy (antiplatelet therapy and anticoagulation therapy) is a key element of pharmacotherapy in patients with CVD. Several reports have suggested that there may be possible differences in optimal therapeutic regimes of antithrombotic therapy among races and ethnics (Tables 3 and 4). Blacks exhibit a pro-inflammatory status and the highest thrombogenic and dysfunctional endothelial profiles, followed by Caucasians (Table 1). On the other hand, East Asian individuals show an inactive inflammatory status and the lowest risk of atherothrombotic events among different ethnic groups. Further, East Asians exhibit higher bleeding risk and a higher prevalence of intracranial haemorrhage (ICH) compared with Caucasians. This review supports a better understanding of the intrinsic differences among races and ethnicities to optimize anti-thrombotic pharmacotherapy for better outcomes. Figure 1 summarizes the main differences in cardiovascular drug requirements and ADRs among Caucasian, Asian, and Black populations.

Do sex and ethnicity influence pharmacotherapy for angina pectoris?

Epidemiology of coronary artery disease

Understanding ethnic and geographical differences in the incidence, prevalence, pathophysiology, investigation, and management of coronary artery disease (CAD) and angina has been of great scientific interest for decades (Table 1). Data from the Global Burden of Disease Study5 suggest that CAD is the second greatest contributor to disability-adjusted life-years worldwide. The global prevalence of CAD was estimated to be 197 million in 2019. However, the prevalence varies significantly between continents. Europe has a prevalence of 3547 per 100 000 in comparison to 1440 per 100 000 observed in Asia and Australasia, 1990 per 100 000 in the Americas, and 880 per 100 000 in Africa.6 Even within European Society of Cardiology member states, there is great variation in the age-standardized incidence between and within ethnic groups and sexes, ranging from 44 per 100 000 female individuals in Portugal to 557 per 100 000 male individuals in Egypt.7 When looking at data within, as opposed to between countries, ethnicity remains associated with differing rates of CAD, reiterating that factors independent of those directly related to the country of residence remain influential. The increased relative rates of CAD in the South Asian community have been replicated in numerous large-scale epidemiological studies both within the United Kingdom and worldwide (Table 1). Of course, a significant proportion of the differing rates and severity of disease can be attributed to socioeconomic and income-related factors.5

Sex and ethnic differences in in-hospital outcomes

The most shocking observational data relate not to sex and ethnic differences in the prevalence of CAD but rather to differences in management decisions and patient outcomes. Despite the relatively a higher prevalence of CAD in male individuals, female individuals experience disproportionately worse outcomes.2 In a large-scale prospective cohort study conducted in the USA, there was a drastic difference in in-hospital complications between ethnic subgroups. Large-scale observational data suggest that a great proportion of these differences may not be related to pathophysiological differences but rather due to differences in care provision, with up to 69% of sex-mortality disparities attributed to suboptimal care provision.8

Racial differences in coronary vasospasm

Data regarding the epidemiology of rare conditions, such as coronary spasm, are less widely available. However, there also appears to be a difference in prevalence between ethnicities. Asian patients were more likely to have coronary spasms than Caucasians: for example, 24.3% in Japanese vs. 7.5% in Caucasians.9 Similar high prevalence has been observed in South Korea.10 Although these figures are frequently cited to represent the epidemiology of the condition, it has also been suggested that current estimates of the global prevalence of vasospastic angina are greatly affected by differential rates of formal testing by distinct countries.

Clinical implication

It is important to consider what this information means for clinical and pharmacotherapy decision-making. In fact, there is very little data to support our approach based on ethnicity, perhaps with exceptions regarding the reduced prescription of clopidogrel and ticagrelor in favour of other antiplatelets in North-Asian populations11 and the widely known association between the reduced effectiveness of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers in Black populations.12 Otherwise, we may adjust the relative weight we place on targeting specific cardiovascular risk factors depending on the ethnic group—for example, identifying and aggressively treating high body mass index (BMI) and hypertension in Black and South Asian populations,13 insulin resistance and diabetic control in South Asian populations, and metabolic syndrome and insulin resistance in Hispanic communities.14

Because of the higher prevalence of coronary spasm in the Japanese than in the Western populations, it is also possible that calcium channel blockers have more potential in the Japanese population for secondary prevention. In two prospective randomized controlled studies in Japanese patients, calcium channel blockers had a protective effect similar to that of β-blockers for cardiovascular events.15

Secondary prevention of CAD: does ‘the lower the better’ apply to Asians?

PCSK9 inhibitors in addition to statins to achieve the LDL-C target

Lowering LDL-cholesterol (LDL-C) levels by statins in CAD is associated with a reduced risk of major cardiovascular events. Proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) inhibitors have been developed as LDL-C-lowering therapies to be used in combination with statins, and their clinical application is gaining significant traction. PCSK9 inhibitors reduced serum LDL-C levels by ≥60%. The pivotal Fourier16 and Odyssey Outcomes17 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials examined the effects of two monoclonal antibodies, evolocumab and alirocumab, against PCSK9 for the suppression of cardiovascular events. Both trials demonstrated that PCSK9 inhibitors in combination with statins can, in addition to lowering LDL-C levels, prevent recurrent cardiovascular events. Based on this fact, the concept of ‘the lower, the better’ was established for LDL-C in the secondary prevention of CAD, and recommendations were made to lower target LDL-C levels in patients with acute coronary syndrome (ACS). For example, the European Society of Cardiology guidelines on dyslipidaemia state that the LDL-C control target is <55 mg/dL.18 Aggressive lipid-lowering therapy may be beneficial, particularly in high-risk groups. However, most patients in the Fourier and Odyssey outcomes trials were non-Asian (∼85% and 80%, respectively).

Asians’ characteristics in LDL-C lowering for secondary prevention

In general, Asians have a higher prevalence of diabetes mellitus than the Western population but a lower BMI and prevalence of dyslipidaemia, and the effect of statins on coronary plaque regression is attenuated in obese patients. Less obese Asians respond better to statins than Westerners do, who have a higher proportion of obese patients. In terms of the dose-response (LDL-C reduction) relationship of statins, the dose of statins required to achieve the same degree of LDL-C reduction is ∼30% less among Asians than among Westerners. Thus, statin dosages in Asia are lower than those in Europe and the USA, probably because genetic polymorphisms in SLCO1B1 and ABCG2 that determine plasma statin levels and statin-induced rhabdomyolysis are more common in Asians.3 Additionally, even at the same cholesterol level, the incidence of myocardial infarction is much lower in Asians than in Europeans and Americans. There remains a controversy about the significance of aggressively lowering LDL-C to, for example, <50 mg/dL, using PCSK9 inhibitors in Asians who originally have low LDL-C and experience fewer cardiovascular events.

The target value for LDL-C management in the Japanese Circulation Society's Guidelines for ACS (revised in 2018) is <70 mg/dL.15 Recently, a sub-analysis of the Fourier trial in patients with ACS reported the safety and efficacy of evolocumab in Asians (n = 2723) compared with individuals of other racial origins (n = 24 841).19 With regard to the patients’ background, myocardial infarction was significantly less prevalent in Asians than in individuals of other races, whereas diabetes mellitus and stroke were more common in Asians. Compared with individuals of other races, BMI and LDL-C levels were significantly lower among Asians, and the use of potent statins was less common in Asians (33.3% Asians vs. 73.3% other races; P < 0.001). The rate of LDL-C reduction with evolocumab was greater among Asians (66%) than among those of other races (58%; P < 0.001), although there was no difference in the incidence of serious adverse reactions. In terms of cardiovascular events, the reduction was similar between Asians [hazard ratio (HR) 0.79; 95% confidence interval (95% CI) 0.61–1.03] and those belonging to other races (HR 0.86; 95% CI 0.79–0.93; P interaction = 0.55). This sub-analysis suggests that lowering the LDL-C level to <50 mg/dL is safe in Asians and may help reduce cardiovascular events to levels similar to those in individuals belonging to other racial groups. However, a regional sub-analysis of Odyssey Outcomes comparing alirocumab vs. placebo showed a significant benefit in Europe and the USA but a neutral trend (no benefit) in the Asian population.17 Although potent lipid-lowering therapy with PSCK9 inhibitors may be helpful in Asians because of their inherently low risk of developing cardiovascular events, it may be better to target patients with higher cardiovascular event risk.

To treat dyslipidaemia as a secondary prevention for CAD, administering the maximum dose of statins is the first priority. From both medical and economic perspectives, it is necessary to further clarify which patients truly require more aggressive lipid-lowering therapy with PCSK9 inhibitors while accounting for racial differences.

Ethnic differences in antiplatelet therapy after percutaneous coronary intervention

‘East Asian paradox’

There were significant differences between East Asian and Caucasian patients in the incidence of thrombotic and bleeding events after percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) and in the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profiles of antiplatelet drugs (Tables 1 and 4).

Dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) with aspirin plus a P2Y  inhibitor is the standard treatment after PCI. During DAPT, patients with high on-treatment platelet reactivity to adenosine diphosphatase are at an increased risk of thrombotic events.20 Therefore, we need to consider an appropriate ‘therapeutic window’ for the use of antiplatelet drugs. The prevalence of patients with high on-treatment platelet reactivity is higher in East Asia than in the USA or Europe. This might be explained by the higher prevalence of CYP2C19 LoF alleles in East Asians, the major determinant of platelet inhibitory activity in clopidogrel.20 Nevertheless, East Asians have a lower incidence of cardiovascular events and a higher incidence of bleeding events than Caucasians. This phenomenon, called the ‘East Asian paradox,’ might be explained by several factors related to the differences in variants of some haemostatic genes.20 The G1691A variant of the factor V gene and the 20210A variant of the prothrombin gene are associated with an increased risk of ischemic events, and the prevalence of these haemostatic gene polymorphisms is higher in Caucasians than in Asians. In addition, Asian patients have lower thrombogenic, proinflammatory, and endothelial dysfunction markers, healthier diet habits, and a lower prevalence of obesity than non-Asian patients (Table 1).

Which P2Y12 inhibitor should be used after PCI in Asians and non-Asians?

New P2Y  inhibitors, such as prasugrel and ticagrelor, which are faster acting and more potent than clopidogrel, have been demonstrated to be superior to clopidogrel in patients with acute coronary ACS. Therefore, in the latest European and American guidelines, DAPT with aspirin and prasugrel or ticagrelor is recommended after PCI in patients with ACS, while DAPT with aspirin and clopidogrel is recommended after PCI for patients with chronic coronary syndrome;21 however, a reduced-dose ticagrelor strategy has not been evaluated in East Asian patients.22

In the PRASFIT-ACS trial in Japan, a reduced dose of prasugrel (3.75 mg) with aspirin compared with clopidogrel with aspirin was associated with a lower risk of cardiovascular events and a similar risk of bleeding events (Table 4, prasugrel). In the A-MATCH trial comparing the de-escalation strategy (prasugrel 5 mg or platelet function test-guided) and standard-dose strategy (prasugrel 10 mg) in East Asians, the prevalence of patients within the therapeutic window was significantly higher in the de-escalation group than in the standard-dose group, and bleeding events were lower in the de-escalation group than in the standard-dose group.23 These data support the inappropriate use of the standard dose of prasugrel in East Asian patients. Based on these trials, in Japan, only a reduced dose of prasugrel (20 mg loading followed by 3.75 mg maintenance) was approved for patients with ACS. Prasugrel is more commonly used among P2Y  inhibitors in Japan (54%) than in the USA (9.6%).24

In both the PHILO25 and TICAKOREA26 trials in East Asia, ticagrelor (90 mg bid) with aspirin compared with clopidogrel (75 mg OD) with aspirin was associated with higher rates of both bleeding and cardiovascular events. Thus, among P2Y  inhibitors, ticagrelor is much less frequently used in Japan (0.1%) than in the USA (32%).24

Genotype-guided strategy for P2Y12 inhibitors

In contrast to the effectiveness of clopidogrel, that of prasugrel or ticagrelor is independent of CYP2C19 polymorphisms.20 Therefore, a CYP2C19 genotype-guided strategy for P2Y  inhibitor use has been proposed and evaluated in several randomized clinical trials (RCTs). In patients with CYP2C19 LoF allele carriers enrolled in the TAILOR-PCI trial, the genotype-guided strategy (85% of this group received ticagrelor) compared with conventional therapy (99% clopidogrel) numerically reduced major cardiovascular events, but did not reach statistical significance (HR 0.66; 95% CI 0.43–1.02; P = 0.06).27 A whole population of this trial included 23% of East Asian patients. The effect of genotype-guided therapy relative to conventional therapy was consistent regardless of race. In the POPular Genetics trial, the genotype-guided strategy (carriers of CYP2C19 LoF alleles received ticagrelor or prasugrel and non-carriers received clopidogrel) compared with the standard strategy (ticagrelor or prasugrel) in all-comes patients with STEMI was associated with similar rates of cardiovascular events and lower rates of bleeding events.28 A very small proportion of Asian patients was included in this trial (2.9%). The efficacy of the genotype-guided strategy for the all-comes population could depend on the prevalence of CYP2C19 LoF alleles. The genotype-guided strategy might be attractive in East Asian patients due to the high prevalence of CYP2C19 LoF alleles, whereas the absolute benefit of potent P2Y12 inhibitors in reducing ischemic events might be small in East Asian patients due to the low ischemic risk in this population. Further studies will be needed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of the genotype-guided strategy for P2Y12 inhibitors in all races and ethnics, including Asian, American, and European patients.

Short DAPT period in Asians and non-Asians

Recently, concerns have been raised regarding the increase in bleeding events associated with prolonged DAPT, especially in East Asian patients due to their high bleeding risk.22 In a meta-analysis of six RCTs, P2Y  inhibitor monotherapy reduced major bleeding without increasing cardiovascular events compared with DAPT, and this result was observed regardless of the patient's region (Asia/North America/Europe).29 However, the majority of patients enrolled in these clinical trials used ticagrelor monotherapy, whereas clopidogrel monotherapy was evaluated only in a limited number of East Asian patients. In the STOPDAPT-2 trial, which enrolled patients with both ACS and chronic coronary syndrome undergoing PCI, clopidogrel monotherapy after 1 month of DAPT was associated with a significantly lower rate of bleeding compared with 12 months of DAPT with aspirin and clopidogrel (HR 0.64; 95% CI 0.42–0.98). However, cardiovascular events were similar between 1 month (1.96%) and 12 months (2.51%) of DAPT groups. In contrast, the STOPDAPT-2 ACS trial, which included only ACS but not chronic CAD patients, demonstrated that clopidogrel monotherapy after 1 month of DAPT was associated with a slight increase in cardiovascular events compared with 12 months of DAPT (HR 1.50; 95% CI 0.99–2.26), despite a significant reduction in major bleeding (HR 0.41; 95% CI 0.20–0.83).30 A meta-analysis suggested that the optimal DAPT duration may be different between East Asians and other ethnic groups.31 Therefore, the ideal antiplatelet regimen may be distinct between East Asians and other ethnic groups, between ticagrelor and clopidogrel, and between ACS and chronic CAD. Further studies are warranted to explore the best antithrombotic regimen after PCI in Asian, American, and European patients.

Ethnic differences in anticoagulant therapy

Anti-coagulation therapy in AF

Atrial fibrillation (AF) is an important cause of stroke and systemic embolism, and anticoagulant therapy is the only therapeutic intervention that improves the survival of patients with AF. There are important racial and ethnic differences in the risk of ICH associated with warfarin therapy in American patients with non-valvular AF (NVAF). Under warfarin administration, targeting an international normalized ratio (INR) of 2.0–3.0, compared with Whites, Blacks, and Hispanics develop ICH 2.2 times more often, whereas Asians develop it 6.5 times more often. A Japanese study found no differences in secondary prevention of stroke between the low-intensity warfarin (INR 1.9; 1.5–2.1) and conventional-intensity groups (INR 2.5; 2.2–3.5), although the rate of major haemorrhagic complications was higher in elderly people assigned to the conventional-intensity group. Based on these data, many Asian countries have adopted a lower INR target range (e.g. 1.6–2.5 instead of 2.0–3.0).

In patients with NVAF, the risk of ischemic events among patients treated with direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) is generally equivalent to or slightly lower than that among those in the warfarin group (HR 0.66–1.13).32 However, the risk of major bleeding, particularly ICH, in the DOAC group was clearly lower than that in the warfarin group (HR 0.30–0.73). Therefore, for patients with NVAF, DOACs are preferred over warfarin in all ethnic groups. However, under same-dose use of DOACs, the risk of ICH in Asian patients with AF remains higher than that in non-Asians.21,32,33 For instance, the frequency of ICH was 0.45%/year in Asians and 0.29%/year in non-Asians receiving dabigatran at 150 mg twice daily and 0.67%/year in Asians and 0.30%/year in non-Asians receiving apixaban at 5 mg twice daily. Under 110 mg bid dabigatran, the frequency of ICH was maintained at 0.23%/year in both non-Asian and Asian populations. In a South Korean cohort study, 75% of the patients received a low dose of dabigatran (100 mg twice daily).33 Nevertheless, compared with warfarin, thromboembolic events were fewer (HR 0.76; 95% CI 0.75–0.81) and the risk of major bleeding was kept low (HR 0.81; 95% CI 0.69–0.95). In addition, two East Asian cohort studies reported that underdosing of DOACs was associated with a comparable risk of thromboembolism and bleeding with their regime-dose use.34,35 In contrast, underdosed DOACs have been associated with a 2.5-times increased risk of thromboembolism compared with regime-dosed DOACs.35 Despite such contradictory results, overdosing increases the risk of major bleeding. ICH is more common in Asians than in non-Asians among patients with AF being administered DOACs. Pharmacokinetic modelling showed that exposure to rivaroxaban was similar in Japanese patients with NVAF who received 15 mg once daily and Caucasians who received 20 mg once daily. This Japanese-specific rivaroxaban dose was not inferior to warfarin but reduced the rates of ICH compared with warfarin;32 therefore, it may be preferable for Asians.

Anti-coagulation therapy in COVID-19

Severe acute respiratory syndrome Coronavirus 2, which causes coronavirus disease (COVID-19), binds to the angiotensin converting enzyme 2 receptor, which is widely expressed in vascular endothelial cells and damages these cells.36 COVID-19 predisposes patients to venous and arterial thrombotic complications due to excessive inflammation, platelet activation, endothelial dysfunction, and stasis.37 Multiple studies have strongly suggested that anticoagulant therapy improves the prognosis of patients with COVID-19, and thromboprophylaxis is currently recommended for patients requiring hospitalization in Europe and America.38 The risk of venous thromboembolism in Asians is lower than that in Caucasians and much lower than that in African Americans.36 The incidence of thrombotic events in hospitalized patients with COVID-19 has been reported to be 16% in New York39 but only 1.9% in Japan.40 Coagulative and fibrinolytic activities are markedly increased in COVID-19 patients, and this increase provides a big impact on their prognosis.36–40 Therefore, the International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis issued an interim guidance recommending the measurement of D-dimer, fibrinogen, prothrombin time, and platelet count in all COVID-19 patients.38 For the treatment of COVID-19-associated hypercoagulability, the interim guidance proposes the use of anticoagulation therapy for a wide range of patients, recommending prophylactic administration of low-molecular-weight heparin for hospitalized COVID-19 patients. Prophylactic anticoagulation therapy is performed in >80% of patients in Europe and the USA and in only 30% of patients in Asia,41 probably because of the high bleeding susceptibility. Therefore, ethnic differences need to be considered when determining thromboprophylaxis strategies for patients with COVID-19, and further evidence is needed to make appropriate decisions for Asian, European, and American patients.

Gaps in knowledge on ethnic/racial differences

We describe important racial/ethnic differences between and within ethnic groups (e.g. East vs. South Asians) in the prevalence, risk factors, haemostatic factors, anti-inflammatory and endothelial markers, recurrence, and outcomes of CVD (Table 1). There are also important differences in the selection, doses, and response (efficacy and ADRs) in patients treated with antithrombotics (warfarin, heparin, and P2Y12 receptor antagonists) or lipid-lowering drugs (Tables 2–5). Differences in drug response are mainly related to racial/ethnic differences in the frequency of polymorphisms in genes encoding DMEs and drug transporters3,20 (Table 6). These polymorphisms markedly influence the pharmacokinetics, dose requirements, and safety of warfarin (CYP2C9 and VKORC1), clopidogrel (CYP2C19), and statins (SLCO1B1 and ABCG2). A better understanding of the genetic differences between and among populations is important to identify patients who may experience an ADR or a lack of drug response, thus optimizing therapy and improving outcomes. They may also explain why the approved doses of some antithrombotics and statins are lower in Asia than in the USA and Europe. Based on the different risk profiles for ischemic and bleeding events among Caucasians, Blacks, and East Asians, ethnicity-tailored antithrombotic strategies for East Asians have been proposed.21,42 These differences should be considered by clinicians treating Asian patients and when designing and interpreting the results of RCTs to optimally treat diverse populations.

A main limitation in understanding ethnic/racial differences is related to the fact that minorities with a disproportionate burden of cardiovascular risk factors, poor outcomes, and low drug concordance have been systematically under-represented in RCTs, and this trend continues today. In pivotal efficacy RCTs supporting the approval of new cardiometabolic drugs from 2008 to 2017, 81% of the recruited patients were Whites, while Blacks, Asians, and Hispanos/Latinos represented only 5%, 12%, and 11% of the population, respectively. Neither are Africans (17% of the world population) proportionately represented in American and European trials nor are African Americans or Hispanics represented in European trials, and the study results with respect to Asians (60% of the world population) are confounded by important differences between East and South Asians and rarely translated into major clinical practice guidelines. Furthermore, many RCTs do not describe baseline demographic data or analyse the efficacy and safety of cardiovascular drugs stratified by race/ethnicity.42 In parallel, important differences in the phenotypic expression of DMEs among races/ethnicities have been primarily analysed in Caucasians and individuals belonging to some other ethnicities but have been poorly analysed among people of developing or semi-peripheral countries (Africa and the Arab world).2 Underrepresentation of some ethnicities in pivotal RCTs has important implications, as it prevents extrapolation of the efficacy and safety of cardiovascular drugs observed in Westerners to those of individuals of other underrepresented ethnic subgroups. Therefore, the ‘one-size-fits-all’ pharmacotherapy strategy based on dose regimens tested mainly in Caucasians may not be optimal for individuals of other ethnic groups, including Asians and Africans.

The US Food and Drug Administration published guidance documents that encourage the adequate enrolment of representative populations and analysis of drug efficacy and safety based on race/ethnicity to increase acceptability in global applications.43 Additionally, regulatory agencies can request additional post-marketing studies to confirm safety and efficacy in specific ethnic groups and to incorporate possible differences in drug labels.42

Future development of pharmacogenomics

Carriers of CYP2C19 LoF alleles undergoing PCI are more frequent in Asian populations than in Africans or Caucasians (Table 6). They present significantly lower levels of the active metabolite, higher platelet reactivity, and a greater risk of major adverse cardiovascular events and stent thrombosis when clopidogrel is prescribed.44 However, some evidence suggests that in these patients, genotype-guided selection of an oral P2Y12 inhibitor reduces the risk of cardiovascular events without increasing the risk of major bleeding.44,45 This has not been confirmed in a recent meta-analysis46 or in a pragmatic study recruiting CYP2C19 LoF carriers with ACS and stable CAD undergoing PCI.47 Thus, based on available evidence, CYP2C19 genotyping is not routinely recommended in patients with stable CAD for the initiation of clopidogrel prescription.4,48,49 Genotyping, however, might be considered in high-risk patients, such as those who had a cardiovascular event while on clopidogrel or at high risk of thrombosis or bleeding, in patients scheduled for PCI who are P2Y12 receptor inhibitor naïve to decide whether they should be treated with higher doses of clopidogrel or an alternative P2Y12 inhibitor (prasugrel, ticagrelor), and in patients on clopidogrel to predict the cardiovascular risk (bleeding and ischemic events) after elective PCI in stable CAD or after PCI for ACS.4,48,49

When genotyping is not available, clinicians may have to rely on the patient’s ethnicity (frequently regarded as a proxy of the patient's probable genotype) to guide individualized prescribing.2 The greater the understanding of the differences in the genetic variants of DMEs and transporters that determine the differences in the exposure, efficacy, and safety of cardiovascular drugs between races/ethnicities, the greater the probability that personalized medicine will become a reality.

Conclusion

Finally, although risk factors and CVD burden are more prevalent in some ethnic groups, many of the same groups simultaneously experience greater barriers to care and are less likely to receive and follow clinical practice guideline-recommended drugs for the prophylaxis and treatment of CVD. Therefore, it remains challenging to obtain full evidence of the benefits of cardiovascular drugs in these populations. Awareness of racial/ethnic disparities represents a key challenge for healthcare systems that attempt to provide effective healthcare and to reduce existing inequalities in the use of and adherence to guideline-recommended cardiovascular drugs to improve CVD clinical outcomes.49 A strategy to reduce these inequalities is to take a holistic approach encompassing not only pharmacogenomic diversity but also differences in lifestyle, health-care provision, socio-economic-cultural determinants, and/or CV risk profiles.50

Supplementary Material

Click here for additional data file. 

Figure 1

Differences in the efficacy and safety of antithrombotic and glucose-lowering drugs among Caucasians, Asians, and Blacks.

