Cross‐species chimeras reveal  BamA POTRA  and  β ‐barrel domains must be fine‐tuned for efficient  OMP  insertion
Summary

   is a conserved molecular machine, the central component of which is  . Orthologues of   are found in all  ram‐negative bacteria, chloroplasts and mitochondria where it is required for the folding and insertion of  ‐barrel containing integral outer membrane proteins ( ) into the outer membrane.   binds unfolded  ‐barrel precursors via the five polypeptide transport‐associated ( ) domains at its  ‐terminus. The  ‐terminus of   folds into a  ‐barrel domain, which tethers   to the outer membrane and is involved in   insertion.   orthologues are found in all  ram‐negative bacteria and appear to function in a species‐specific manner. Here we investigate the nature of this species‐specificity by examining whether chimeric   scherichia coli    fusion proteins, carrying either the  ‐barrel or   domains from various   orthologues, can functionally replace   . coli   . We demonstrate that the  ‐barrel domains of many   orthologues are functionally interchangeable. We show that defects in the orthologous   domains can be rescued by compensatory mutations within the  ‐barrel. These data reveal that the   and barrel domains must be precisely aligned to ensure efficient   insertion.

Introduction

The insertion of β‐barrel containing integral outer membrane proteins (OMPs) into the outer membrane of Escherichia coli is achieved by the multi‐protein β‐barrel assembly machine, the BAM complex (Knowles et al., 2009; Hagan et al., 2011). In E. coli, this complex molecular machine consists of the OMP BamA (BamA : the subscript indicates the source of the BamA sequence used e.g. Ec refers to E. coli) and the four accessory lipoproteins (BamB–E). BamA  is an essential protein in E. coli and belongs to the BamA/Omp85 family of proteins (Voulhoux et al., 2003; Anwari et al., 2012). The N‐terminal periplasmic domain of BamA  is composed of five polypeptide transport‐associated (POTRA) motifs (POTRA  to POTRA ) and a C‐terminal β‐barrel domain, which anchors the protein in the outer membrane (Knowles et al., 2009; Hagan et al., 2011). The POTRA domains have been shown to bind unfolded OMPs, being responsible for delivering them to the outer membrane, as well as scaffolding the BAM lipoproteins to the complex. BamD binds directly to POTRA , while BamB associates through POTRA  to POTRA  (Kim et al., 2007; Knowles et al., 2008; Gatzeva‐Topalova et al., 2010; Patel and Kleinschmidt, 2013). BamC and BamE do not bind BamA  directly, but associate with the BAM complex through BamD (Kim et al., 2007). The recent crystal structures of BamA  and its orthologues have demonstrated that in BamA proteins, the C‐terminal domain folds into a 16‐stranded β‐barrel, over which the external loops (L1–L8) converge to form a covering dome (Noinaj et al., 2013; Albrecht et al., 2014; Ni et al., 2014). In E. coli, many of the loops are essential for BamA  function, in particular L6, which is partially located within the barrel lumen because of an interaction between the barrel wall and the conserved VRGF amino acid motif at its tip (Delattre et al., 2010; Leonard‐Rivera and Misra, 2012; Browning et al., 2013; Noinaj et al., 2013; Rigel et al., 2013; Albrecht et al., 2014; Ni et al., 2014).

BAM is an evolutionary conserved machine, components of which are found in eukaryotic mitochondria and chloroplasts, as well as Gram‐negative bacteria (Voulhoux et al., 2003; Tommassen, 2010). BamA and BamD are essential in E. coli and found in all Gram‐negative bacteria. However, the other components of the complex are less conserved, for example Neisserial species lack BamB, while in some bacteria, additional accessory components are part of the BAM complex, such as Pal and BamF in Caulobacter crescentus and RmpM in Neisseria meningitidis (Volokhina et al., 2009; Anwari et al., 2010; 2012). During OMP insertion, BamA orthologues are thought to recognise the C‐terminal residues of unfolded OMPs and it has been suggested that this is species‐specific (Robert et al., 2006; Paramasivam et al., 2012). Biophysical analyses have suggested that bacterial BamA proteins function in a species‐specific manner, being optimised for folding OMPs from that species (Robert et al., 2006). Other studies are consistent with this as only BamA orthologues from closely related bacterial species can rescue BamA depletion in E. coli (Noinaj et al., 2013; Ruhe et al., 2013; Volokhina et al., 2013). Thus, it is surprising that E. coli BamA can insert mitochondrial porins into its outer membrane (Walther et al., 2010), while the analogous mitochondrial machinery can insert bacterial OMPs into the mitochondrial outer membrane (Walther et al., 2009). Therefore, to investigate this species specificity in more detail, we generated a series of chimeric BamA fusion proteins, which carry either the POTRA or barrel domains of BamA orthologues from a wide range of proteobacteria. We demonstrate that the barrel domains, and to some degree, the POTRA domains of BamA orthologues are interchangeable and that for efficient complex function, the POTRA and barrel domains must be precisely tailored.

Results

Rescue of BamA depletion by β‐barrel chimera fusion proteins

As BamA orthologues were suggested to function in a species‐specific manner (Robert et al., 2006; Paramasivam et al., 2012; Noinaj et al., 2013; Ruhe et al., 2013; Volokhina et al., 2013), we reasoned that species specificity would reside in the POTRA domains, and not the β‐barrels, as the POTRA domains are predicted to be the first point of contact between nascent OMPs, their periplasmic chaperones and the BAM complex. To test this hypothesis, we generated chimeric constructs in which the DNA encoding the E. coli BamA POTRA domains was fused in register to that encoding the barrel domains of BamA orthologues from a selection of phylogenetically diverse Gram‐negative bacteria (Fig. 1A, Table S1 and Fig. S1). As BamA  is essential in E. coli, we examined whether any of the barrel chimeras rescued loss of the native BamA. The DNA encoding each fusion was cloned into vector pET17b and transformed into the previously described E. coli K‐12 depletion strain, JWD3 (Lehr et al., 2010). In JWD3 chromosomally encoded BamA  is only produced in the presence of arabinose, while in its absence, BamA  expression is shut down and BamA  levels are depleted by successive cell divisions resulting in cell death; depletion can be rescued by providing a functional plasmid‐encoded copy of the E. coli bamA, such as pET17b/bamAEc (Browning et al., 2013). Results in Fig. 1B show that, with the exception of the Helicobacter pylori fusion BamA , all of the barrel chimeras supported growth in the absence of arabinose. While cells carrying the Agrobacterium tumefaciens BamA  fusion grow particularly slowly, they can be repeatedly passaged in the absence of arabinose. Western blotting of total protein extracts and outer membrane preparations with anti‐E. coli BamA POTRA antiserum demonstrated that all the chimeras were expressed and localised to the outer membrane (Fig. 1C and D), with the exception of BamA . Interestingly, although the Pseudomonas aeruginosa BamA , A. tumefaciens BamA  and N. meningitidis BamA  barrel chimeras support growth in liquid culture, Western blotting using anti‐OmpF antiserum indicated that, in the absence of arabinose, the levels of OmpF, OmpC and OmpA porins were considerably lower than in cells producing BamA  (Fig. 1C). Thus, although the barrels of most orthologues can be readily swapped to maintain viability, it is clear that some fusions function considerably better than others.

Increased expression of β‐barrel chimeras improves function

During our study, we noted that the BamA , BamA  and BamA  barrel chimeras rescued depletion in liquid culture (Fig. 1B), but that JWD3 cells carrying these fusions did not form colonies on agar plates without arabinose (Fig. S2A). The reason for this is unclear, but may reflect increased stress associated with growth on solid surfaces. Therefore, to isolate chimeric constructs, which rescued depletion on solid medium, we passaged JWD3 cells, carrying pET17b/bamAEPa   pET17b/bamAEAt or pET17b/bamAENm in liquid culture and plated cells onto agar plates without arabinose. Using this strategy, we isolated plasmids encoding BamA , BamA  and BamA  constructs, which rescued BamA depletion on solid medium (Fig. 2A and S3). Surprisingly, sequencing of each plasmid construct failed to detect any differences in the DNA sequence encoding each chimera, but rather point mutations were identified in the sequence encoding the RNA I/II copy number control region of pET17b (Fig. S2B). To investigate whether these mutations had an impact on plasmid copy number, we isolated plasmid DNA from similar numbers of JWD3 cells transformed with either the initial plasmid constructs encoding BamA , BamA  and BamA  or their cognate evolved plasmids. Agarose gel electrophoresis revealed more plasmid DNA was isolated from strains harbouring the evolved plasmids suggesting that the copy number of each plasmid had increased (Fig. 2B and S3). Western immunoblotting of whole‐cell fractions revealed that each of the strains harbouring the evolved plasmids produced higher levels of the chimeric BamA (Fig. 2 and S3) and in liquid culture growth rates under depletion conditions resembled those of strains harbouring native BamA  (Fig. S2C and D). Thus, the ability of these barrel chimeras to rescue depletion can be improved by increasing their cellular concentrations to that resembling native E. coli BamA.

 TpsB β‐barrels do not functionally substitute for BamA β‐barrels

The BamA/Omp85 superfamily includes distantly related members such as the TpsB β‐barrels of the two‐partner secretion systems e.g. FhaC from Bordetella pertussis and EtpB from enterotoxigenic E. coli (Fleckenstein et al., 2006; Clantin et al., 2007; Meli et al., 2009). These TpsB proteins recognise specific proteins rich in β‐strands and secrete them across the outer membrane, whereas BamA orthologues fold β‐stranded OMPs into the membrane. Thus, we wished to investigate whether a β‐barrel domain derived from a TpsB protein would be able to functionally replace that of BamA . To test this, we fused the DNA encoding the BamA  POTRA domains with that encoding the EtpB barrel, to generate an EtpB barrel chimera construct (BamA ) (Table S1 and Fig. S1). Results in Fig. 3 demonstrate that while the BamA  fusion was produced and folded into the outer membrane it was unable to rescue BamA depletion in JWD3, suggesting that only barrels from true BamA orthologues can functionally replace that of E. coli BamA.

Rescue of BamA depletion by POTRA chimera fusion proteins

To evaluate the role of the POTRA domains in BamA species‐specificity, we generated a second series of chimeric constructs in which the POTRA domain of each orthologue was fused to the barrel of BamA  (Table S1 and Fig. S1). Initially, gene fusions were subcloned into pET17b and their ability to rescue BamA depletion was examined in liquid medium in JWD3. Results in Fig. S4 show that only the Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium POTRA chimera (BamA ) supported growth of JWD3 cells in the absence of arabinose. As the cellular level of BamA is important (Aoki et al., 2008), we hypothesised increased expression of the fusion proteins would allow them to rescue depletion of BamA. Thus, the chimeric genes encoding the Haemophilus influenzae, P. aeruginosa and N. meningitidis POTRA domains (BamA , BamA  and BamA ) were cloned into the high copy number (> 100 copies) expression vector, pASK‐IBA33plus (pASK). These new constructs contained an N‐terminal His‐tag to allow detection by immunoblotting; previous investigations revealed the His‐Tag did not have an impact on function (Kim et al., 2007; Browning et al., 2013). Results in Fig. 4A show that leaky uninduced expression from pASK enabled the BamA  and BamA  POTRA chimeras to rescue BamA depletion, while the BamA  chimera did not. Interestingly, low‐level induction of BamA  expression retarded growth, suggesting that elevated levels of BamA  are toxic. Western blotting of whole‐cell lysates with anti‐OmpF antiserum demonstrated that in cells expressing His‐tagged versions of BamA  and BamA , porin levels were comparable with those observed for BamA  (Fig. 4B). Furthermore, His versions of each POTRA chimera could be detected, but their levels were lower than that observed for BamA , suggesting that these chimeric proteins may be unstable or poorly expressed (Fig. 4B). Thus, we conclude that the BamA  and BamA  POTRA chimeras can functionally replace E. coli BamA , rescuing BamA depletion and facilitating E. coli OMP insertion.

Mutations at the POTRA‐β‐barrel interface improve BamANmE function

Although the N. meningitidis POTRA chimera BamA  rescued depletion in liquid medium, it was unable to do so on agar plates (Fig. S5). To isolate versions of BamA  that were capable of growing on agar, we repeatedly passaged JWD3 cells carrying the His‐BamA  chimera cloned into pASK in the absence of arabinose and plated cells out onto nutrient agar plates lacking arabinose. By doing this, we isolated four candidates that rescued depletion on plates. Sequencing of the DNA encoding each chimeric construct identified each had an independent non‐synonymous substitution resulting in the following amino acid conversion: R370C, R388G, E521G and E521A (Table 1 and Fig. 5A). The R370C, R388G and E521G mutations were transferred into a clean plasmid background, and it was confirmed that only these mutations were required for this phenotype (Fig. S5). The growth of JWD3 cells, carrying these improved His‐tagged BamA  constructs, in liquid medium was similar to the original His‐tagged BamA  construct (Fig. 5B). However, in the absence of arabinose, the cellular levels of these proteins were considerably higher (Fig. 5C).

To understand the molecular basis for these mutations we investigated the location of each mutation in BamA using molecular models of the chimeric assemblies. The R370C and R388G mutations occurred in POTRA  while the E521G and E521A mutations occurred in turn T3 of the E. coli barrel domain (Fig. 5D and E). In the crystal structure of Neisseria gonorrhoeae BamA (BamA ), POTRA  makes extensive contacts with the periplasmic turns of the barrel and residues R370, R388 and E523 (equivalent to E521 from T3 in E. coli) are involved in this interaction network; the amino acid sequences of BamA from N. gonorrhoeae and from N. meningitidis display 96% identity (Noinaj et al., 2013). The available structures of BamA  either lack POTRA domains altogether (Ni et al., 2014) or have POTRA  pointing away from the barrel (Albrecht et al., 2014), making interpretation of POTRA‐barrel interactions difficult. Therefore, we modelled the POTRA –barrel interactions for BamA  and the BamA  chimera based on the POTRA orientation observed in the BamA  structure reported by Noinaj et al. (2013) and using the experimental X‐ray structures of E. coli barrels (Albrecht et al., 2014; Ni et al., 2014). From this comparative analysis, it is immediately obvious that steric and electrostatic clashes between R370 and R388 would arise in the chimeric BamA  protein (Fig. 5D). In particular, R583 from T4 of the E. coli barrel has the capacity to clash with both R370 and R388 in BamA . Correspondingly, the isolated R370C and R388G mutations (Fig. 5D) alleviate this clash, restoring the charge balance observed in the Neisserial protein. Furthermore, extrapolating the side‐chain orientations from the available N. gonorrhoeae BamA  crystal structure, E523 (in T3) is in close proximity to E363 (POTRA ), which is unfavourable from electrostatic point of view. This residue pair is non‐conserved, and indeed such electrostatic repulsion is avoided in E. coli as position 363 in BamA  is alanine (Fig. 5E) (Noinaj et al., 2013). Presuming a similar orientation of the Neisserial POTRA domains in our BamA  POTRA chimera we expect a potential for a similar clash between E363 and E521, as in BamA , and this is relieved by the E521G/A substitutions making this new chimeric interface more BamA  like (Fig. 5E). Thus, we conclude that mutations in BamA  allow POTRA  to adopt different orientations with respect to the barrel domain.

Allosteric mutations improve the function of P . aeruginosa  POTRA chimera constructs

The P. aeruginosa BamA  POTRA chimera failed to rescue BamA depletion (Fig. 4). Initial attempts to isolate improved versions of the BamA  chimera, by passaging plasmid constructs through the mutator strain XL‐1 Red, also failed. Therefore, to examine which P. aeruginosa POTRA domains prevented the chimera from functioning in E. coli, we generated an additional set of chimeric constructs, cloned into pASK. Starting with BamA , we progressively replaced the P. aeruginosa POTRA domains with those from E. coli to generate constructs which possessed P. aeruginosa POTRA  (BamA ), POTRA  (BamA ), POTRA  (BamA ) and POTRA  only (BamA ) (Fig. 6A). We also generated constructs in which the P. aeruginosa POTRA , POTRA  and POTRA  were individually replaced with those from BamA  (i.e. BamA , BamA  and BamA ; Fig. 6A). The ability of each construct to rescue BamA depletion was then examined in strain JWD3 in liquid culture and on agar plates. Results in Figs. 6B and S5 show that only constructs which carried both E. coli POTRA  and POTRA  could rescue BamA depletion. As these chimeric fusions carry E. coli POTRA domains, we examined whether fusions were detectable using Western blotting with anti‐E. coli POTRA antiserum. Results in Fig. 5C reveal that the BamA , BamA  and BamA  chimeras, which all rescue depletion, could be detected in whole‐cell preparations of BamA‐depleted cells (lanes 12–14). Western blotting using anti‐P. aeruginosa BamA antiserum also demonstrated that the BamA , BamA , BamA  and BamA  chimeric proteins were expressed in arabinose‐grown cells; however, the level of each protein was considerably lower when BamA was depleted (Fig 6D). Thus, we conclude that differences in P. aeruginosa POTRA  and POTRA  prevent the BamA  chimera from functioning in E. coli.

As the P. aeruginosa BamA  chimera did not rescue BamA depletion (Fig. 6), we also attempted to mutate this plasmid construct by passaging it through the XL–1 Red mutator strain. Plasmid DNA, isolated from XL‐1 Red cells, was transformed into JWD3 and cells were plated out onto on arabinose‐free agar. Using this strategy, we isolated 14 mutant constructs that rescued BamA depletion. Unexpectedly, DNA sequencing of each chimera indicated that point mutations, which enabled BamA  to function, were all located within the BamA  β‐barrel domain and not in the POTRA domains (Table 1 and Fig. 7A). For five of these constructs (E470G, D614G, D614N, A654T and D746N), the DNA encoding each chimera was transferred into a clean plasmid background and each construct retained the ability to rescue depletion (Figs. 7B and S5). Western blotting with anti‐OmpF antiserum indicated that these improved BamA  chimeras could insert E. coli porins in the absence of E. coli BamA (Fig. 7C) and blotting with anti‐P. aeruginosa BamA antiserum demonstrated that in the absence of arabinose, the cellular levels of these proteins were higher than that observed for the original BamA  construct (Fig. 7D).

To understand the molecular basis for these gain‐of‐function mutations, we investigated the position of these amino acids in BamA. Many of these compensatory substitutions fall within β‐strands (e.g. E470G and D614G) and would destabilise them, increasing barrel flexibility (Merkel and Regan, 1998) (Fig. 7E). Substitution D746N disrupts the network of salt bridges, which hold loops L4, L6 and L7 together, likely making the whole barrel domain less rigid (Fig. 7E). Other mutations, such as A654T and S657F, are predicted to alter the trajectory of L6 within the barrel (Fig. 7E). We have analysed the packing of the L6 loop in the available structures, which present six non‐crystallographic copies of the loop from three different organisms. Structural superposition and B‐factor analysis (Fig. S6A) reveal striking conservation of the trajectory of the loop within the barrel in all current structures, while on the outside of the barrel it displays a high degree of flexibility, as expected for a typical non‐structured loop. The intra‐barrel section of the L6 also appears to be extremely rigid as indicated by the very low B‐factor values, and has a near identical match in all structures with a root‐mean‐square deviation from 0.22 to 0.67 Å, which is below the range of coordinate error for the structures. This extends beyond the C‐alpha atoms to the side‐chains, and is particularly evident for the VRGF motif, suggestive of the need for precise alignment of the structural elements of the loop for its functional activity (Fig. S6B). As L6 is precisely folded in all six available structures, and the L6 VGRF motif is tightly associated with the barrel (Fig. S6A), alterations of the loop will have a significant impact on the folded state of the β‐barrel, particularly S657F, which would generate a direct steric clash with β16 (Noinaj et al., 2013; 2014; Albrecht et al., 2014; Ni et al., 2014). In addition, mutations in L1 (T434I and S436P) and β16 (N805S) are likely to affect the pairing of β1 and β16, lowering the kinetic barrier for barrel unfolding (Fig. 7E). Thus, we conclude that defects in the POTRA domain can be bypassed by substitutions in the barrel domain, which improve the alignment of POTRA relative to the barrel and/or facilitate the opening of the barrel.

Discussion

To understand the nature of the BAM species specificity, we generated a series of BamA β‐barrel and POTRA chimeras. Bioinformatic analyses indicated that the barrel domains of BamA orthologues are more conserved than their corresponding POTRA domains (Arnold et al., 2010) and consistent with this, we found that most barrel chimeras were expressed, located in the outer membrane and rescued BamA  depletion (Fig. 1). Only the H. pylori barrel chimera failed to rescue BamA depletion. As we were unable to detect this protein product, this suggests that this fusion is likely unstable in E. coli. In contrast, Volokhina et al. (2013) investigated the species‐specificity observed between BamA  and N. meningitidis BamA (BamA ), by expressing the full‐length BamA  protein and similar barrel and POTRA chimeras in E. coli. Although protein products were detected and E. coli BamD was capable of binding to BamA , all of these constructs failed to rescue depletion. In each case, gene expression was induced from plasmid pFP10 (Volokhina et al., 2013), while in our system, we relied on low‐level leaky expression from either pET17b or pASK. Indeed, inducing expression of the BamA  POTRA chimera (Fig. 4A), even at low levels, retarded growth considerably, implying toxicity. Thus, we think it likely that the differences observed between the two studies are due to the different experimental systems employed.

It is of note that some barrel chimeras functioned poorly compared with the native protein. However, even slightly increasing the expression levels of these proteins greatly improved their ability to rescue depletion. As such BamA β‐barrels can functionally replace that of E. coli, this would suggest that the mechanism of barrel‐mediated OMP insertion has been conserved. Thus, it is quite surprising that the growth of strains expressing elevated levels of BamA  or BamA  were similar to the wild type on plates and in liquid medium, yet still poorly assembled porins into the outer membrane (Figs. 2 and S2).

While TpsB proteins, such as EtpB, are responsible for secreting TpsA proteins, e.g. EtpA, across the outer membrane (Fleckenstein et al., 2006; Meli et al., 2009) and BamA inserts many different OMPs into a lipid environment both recognise nascent β‐strands and have a conserved VGRF motif in L6 (Delattre et al., 2010). However, our BamA  barrel chimera failed to rescue BamA depletion in JWD3 (Fig. 3). Many of the recent crystal structures of BamA proteins demonstrate that the β1 and β16 β‐strands of BamA β‐barrels are unstably paired and it has been proposed that they separate to provide a template for OMP folding (Noinaj et al., 2013; 2014; Albrecht et al., 2014). Furthermore, it has been suggested that distortion and thinning of the lipid bilayer by the BamA β‐barrel also facilitates OMP insertion (Noinaj et al., 2013; Gessmann et al., 2014). In contrast, TpsB barrels demonstrate a high degree of barrel stability at the β1–β16 interface, and thus, it is not surprising that the BamA  chimera failed to rescue depletion (Clantin et al., 2007).

The POTRA domains act as the initial docking sites for chaperones and unfolded OMPs, as well as scaffolding the BAM lipoproteins and other associated proteins (Hagan et al., 2011; Webb et al., 2012). Therefore, we predicted that the majority of species‐specificity would reside within the POTRA domains. While it is clear that the cellular levels of some POTRA chimeras were low (Fig. 4B), suggesting that the different POTRA domains affect the biogenesis or stability of the chimeric BamA proteins, several of the POTRA chimeras folded E. coli porins to levels approaching that of wild‐type strains (Fig. 4B). We note that in the presence of arabinose, the levels of the POTRA chimeras are higher than in its absence (Fig. 4B). As chromosomally encoded BamA  is expressed under these conditions in JWD3, this indicates that BamA  is able to fold each chimeric protein more efficiently than when only each chimera is expressed. The gain‐of‐function chimeras also folded E. coli porins to levels approaching that of wild‐type strains. The ability of these chimeras to assemble the porins suggests that in contrast to our initial hypothesis, no species specificity resides within the POTRA domains and the accessory lipoproteins, chaperones and nascent OMPs can interact with POTRA domains from diverse species to create a functional complex.

While the BamA  POTRA chimera failed to rescue BamA depletion because of differences in POTRA  and POTRA , the P. aeruginosa BamA  POTRA chimera, which has P. aeruginosa POTRA , could be made to function by introducing substitutions within the β‐barrel (Figs. 7 and S5; Table 1). The locations of compensatory substitutions indicate that they will increase the flexibility of the BamA  β‐barrel, facilitating more efficient communication between the POTRA and barrel domains, while others will affect the pairing of β1 and β16, influencing barrel opening by lowering the activation energy of barrel unwrapping and facilitating strand invasion by the nascent OMP chain. Indeed, in one BamA  structure, N805 stabilises the β16 kink observed in the terminal β‐strand (Noinaj et al., 2013; Albrecht et al., 2014). It is also of note that, L1 forms part of a pore by which the external loops of folding OMPs may exit BamA and so our substitutions could also affect this process (Noinaj et al., 2013; 2014; Albrecht et al., 2014; Ni et al., 2014).

In conclusion, our results demonstrate that the level of BamA expression is critical for the BAM to function, and that defects in the POTRA domains can be compensated for by substitutions within the barrel. The latter data suggest that the POTRA and barrel domains communicate during OMP biogenesis and that their interactions must be fine‐tuned for efficient OMP folding. Importantly, our data reveal there is no strong amino acid template within BamA that confers species specificity for particular OMPs.

Experimental procedures

Bacterial strains, growth conditions, plasmids and primers

The bacterial strains, plasmids, DNA fragments and primers used in this study are detailed in Table S1. RLG221 was used as a standard E. coli K‐12 strain throughout and all bacteria were cultured in Lennox broth [2% (w/v) peptone (Merck, Kenilworth, NJ, USA), 1% (w/v) yeast extract (Fisher Scientific, Loughborough, UK) and 170 mM NaCl] (Squire et al., 2010) and on nutrient agar (Oxoid, Basingstoke, Hampshire, UK). Ampicillin (100 μg ml−1) was included in media where appropriate. Low‐level protein expression was induced in cells carrying pASK plasmid derivatives by the addition of anhydrotetracycline to 2 ng ml−1.

To determine the ability of plasmid constructs to rescue BamA depletion on solid media, the E. coli BamA depletion strain JWD3 was grown on agar plates in the presence or absence of 0.2% (w/v) arabinose (Lehr et al., 2010). To assess this in liquid media, JWD3 cells were grown in 50 ml of Lennox broth at 37 °C with shaking in the presence of 0.05% (w/v) arabinose or 0.05% (w/v) fructose, as a control, and optical density (OD ) was monitored over time. After 300 min growth, cultures were sampled for analysis. All growth curves were done at least twice and representative curves are shown in figures. If constructs failed to rescue depletion in the presence of fructose, no further growth was detected after this point.

Plasmid construction

The DNA encoding each BamA orthologue was synthesised by Genscript (http://www.genscript.com) and cloned into pET17b using NdeI and XhoI. Each orthologue construct possessed the DNA encoding for the E. coli BamA signal sequence, ensuring efficient transit across the inner membrane, and were codon optimised for high‐level expression in E. coli (Fig. S1 and Table S1). To aid gene manipulation, each ORF was purged of restriction sites and unique sites for NdeI, NheI, BamHI and XhoI were introduced to facilitate easy swapping of the POTRA and barrel domains (Fig. S1). POTRA and barrel chimeras were, therefore, generated by sub‐cloning the relevant NdeI‐BamHI and BamHI‐XhoI DNA fragments into pET17b/bamAEc. The POTRA and barrel chimeras are designated BamA  and BamA , respectively, were X denotes the initials of the bacterial species from which the POTRA or barrel domains derives. pASK derivatives, carrying the DNA encoding BamA POTRA chimeras, were generated using PCR. DNA was amplified using the relevant pET17b construct as template, with primers BamABsaI and PetTerm. PCR products were cloned into pASK using BsaI and XhoI. N‐terminal His epitope tags were introduced into BamA POTRA chimera constructs using PCR. DNA was amplified using the required His primer (Table S1) and BamA1372Rev, with the relevant pASK chimeric construct as template. Product was restricted with NheI and BamHI and cloned into pASK/bamAEc, placing the His tag directly after the signal sequence in each case. All DNA constructs were verified by DNA sequencing.

The BamA  barrel chimera construct was generated using PCR. The DNA encoding the EtpB barrel was amplified using primers EtpBUp and EtpBDown, with plasmid pJMF1002 as template (Fleckenstein et al., 2006). Product was restricted with BamHI and XhoI, cloned into pET17b/bamAEc and verified by DNA sequencing.

The swapping of individual POTRA motifs between BamA  and BamA  was achieved using mega‐primer PCR (Sarkar and Sommer, 1990; Rossiter et al., 2011a). For POTRA chimeras BamA , BamA , BamA  and BamA  the first‐round PCR product was generated using primer BamA1372Rev and primers Pa4Ec5, Pa3Ec4, Pa2Ec3 and Pa1Ec2 with pET17b/bamAEc as template. PCR products were used in a second round of PCR with primer PetPro and the POTRA chimera construct pET17b/bamAPaE as template. For POTRA chimera BamA  the first‐round PCR used primers Ec1Pa2 and BamA1372Rev with pET17b/bamAPaE as template and primer PetPro and pET17b/bamAEc in the second‐round PCR. Chimeras BamA  and BamA  were generated using primers BamA1372Rev and either Ec3Pa4 and Ec4Pa5 with pET17b/bamAPaE as template. In the second round, PCR products were used with primer PetPro and pASK/bamAPa1–2 and pASK/bamAPa1–3, respectively, as template. All PCR products were cloned into pASK/bamAEC using NheI and BamHI and verified by DNA sequencing.

Sample preparation and Western blotting

JWD3 cells, carrying various pET17b and pASK constructs were grown in 50 ml of Lennox broth at 37°C with shaking for 300 min in the presence of 0.05% (w/v) arabinose or fructose. The preparation of normalised total cellular protein samples, isolation of membrane fractions from cultures and the washing of membranes with urea were carried out as detailed Browning et al. (2013). Protein samples were resolved by SDS‐PAGE and analysed using Western blotting as in (Rossiter et al., 2011b). E. coli BamA protein was detected using anti‐E. coli POTRA BamA antiserum (Rossiter et al., 2011b), P. aeruginosa BamA using anti‐BamA  antiserum, OmpF, OmpC and OmpA proteins were detected using anti‐OmpF antiserum and NarL using anti‐NarL antibodies, all raised in rabbit. N‐terminal His tags were detected using anti‐His tag mouse monoclonal antibodies (Sigma‐Aldrich, Gillingham, Dorset, UK). Blots were developed using the ECL Western Blotting Detection System (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, Buckinghamshire, UK).

Structural modelling of BamA 

To generate the full‐length composite model of the E. coli BamA  protein (GenBank AAC73288), we used the X‐ray barrel structure of BamA  (4C4V) (Albrecht et al., 2014), splicing in the missing L6 loop from the alternative Bam  structure (4N75) (Ni et al., 2014) and manually building the missing C‐terminal residues using Coot (Emsley et al., 2010). I‐TASSER (Roy et al., 2010) was used with specific templates (3OG5) (Gatzeva‐Topalova et al., 2010) to generate an additional model for POTRA , arranged according to the full‐length N. gonorrhoeae BamA  POTRA orientation (4K3B) (Noinaj et al., 2014). The final models were manually optimised using Coot (Emsley et al., 2010). Structural superposition has been performed using Gesamt and SSM as implemented in CCP4 suite (Winn et al., 2011). Structural visualisations were done with PyMOL (Schrodinger, 2010).

Conflict of interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Supporting information

Supporting information. Click here for additional data file. 

Figure 1

Rescue of   depletion by barrel chimera constructs.

A. Cladistic analysis of the bacteria used in this study based on the   sequence of the 16S   genes.   scherichia coli (Ec),   almonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (St),   aemophilus influenzae (Hi),   asteurella multocida ( m),   seudomonas aeruginosa ( a),   eisseria meningitidis (Nm),   grobacterium tumefaciens ( t) and   elicobacter pylori ( p).

B.   . coli   3 cells, carrying   barrel chimera constructs cloned into p 17b, were grown in  ennox broth supplemented with either arabinose (+ Ara) or fructose as a control (–Ara).

C. Detection of   barrel chimeras. The panel shows  estern blots of normalised total cell protein from the  3 cells in panel   after 300 min of growth. Blots were probed with anti‐  . coli    antiserum to detect     and each barrel chimera, anti‐  antiserum to detect   . coli   ,   and  , and anti‐  antibody to detect  , as a loading control.

D. Outer membrane containing fractions were prepared from  3 cells, carrying   barrel chimera constructs cloned into p 17b, grown in the presence of arabinose; 0.2 μg of outer membrane protein was  estern blotted with anti‐  . coli    antiserum (top) and 2 μg was analysed using   and stained with  oomassie blue (bottom). Constructs are as follows:   . coli      (Ec),   . enterica serovar  yphimurium barrel chimera ( ),   s. aeruginosa barrel chimera ( ),   a. multocida barrel chimera ( ),   . tumefaciens barrel chimera ( ),   . meningitidis barrel chimera ( ),   e. pylori barrel chimera ( ) and   a. influenzae barrel chimera ( ).

Figure 2

Rescue of   depletion by the   grobacterium tumefaciens and   eisseria meningitidis barrel chimera constructs.

A. Growth of  3 cells on nutrient agar pates in the presence or absence of arabinose, while carrying the   . tumefaciens      ( ) and   . meningitidis      ( ) barrel chimeras cloned into p 17b.

B. Plasmid   from normalised amounts of  3 cells, carrying different     and     constructs cloned into p 17b, was prepared using a  gen miniprep kit and analysed using agarose gel electrophoresis with ethidium bromide staining.

C. Detection of   grobacterium tumefaciens and   eisseria meningitidis barrel chimeras. The panel shows  estern blots of normalised total cell protein from the  3 cells carrying     and     chimeras cloned into  17b, after 300 min of growth in  ennox broth supplemented with arabinose. Blots were probed with anti‐  scherichia coli    antiserum to detect    ,     and    .

D. The panel shows  estern blots of normalised total cell protein from the  3 cells, carrying the various     and     chimeras, after 300 min of growth in  ennox broth supplemented with either arabinose (+ Ara) or fructose (–Ara). Blots were probed with anti‐  . coli    antiserum to detect    ,     and     and with anti‐  antiserum to detect  ,   and  . A non‐specific band is used as a loading control ( ).

Figure 3

Analysis of the     barrel chimera.

A. Escherichia coli   3 cells, carrying the     barrel chimera cloned into  17b, were grown in  ennox broth supplemented with arabinose (+ ra) or fructose (− ra).

B. Detection of the     barrel chimera. The panel shows  estern blots of normalised total cell protein from the  3 cells in panel A after 300 min of growth. Blots were probed with anti‐  . coli    antiserum to detect     and the     barrel chimera.

C. Outer membranes preparations from  3 cells grown in the presence of arabinose were incubated with 5   of urea in   to solubilise membrane‐associated protein aggregates. Samples were analysed using  ‐  analysis and  estern blotted with anti‐  . coli    antiserum. Results show that both     and     are correctly folded into the outer membrane as they localised to the urea insoluble fraction.

Figure 4

Rescue of   depletion by   chimera constructs.

A.   scherichia coli   3 cells, carrying   chimeras cloned into  , were grown in  ennox broth supplemented with either arabinose (+ ra), fructose (− ra) or induced at low levels with 2 ng ml−1 of anhydrotetracycline (− ra/+ et). The point of induction is shown by an arrow.

B. Detection of  is‐  chimeras. The panel shows  estern blots of normalised total cell protein from the  3 cells, carrying  is‐  chimeras cloned into p , after 300 min of growth in  ennox broth supplemented with either arabinose (+  ra) or fructose (− ra). Blots were probed with anti‐ is antiserum to detect  is‐    and  is‐  chimeras, anti‐  antiserum to detect  ,   and  . A non‐specific band is used as a loading control ( ). Constructs are labelled as follows:   . coli      (Ec),   aemophilus influenzae    chimera ( ),   seudomonas aeruginosa    chimera ( ) and   eisseria meningitidis    chimera ( ). Note: to ensure the same sample loading order occurs throughout panel B, the order of  / /A and loading control samples has been changed with respect to the original  estern blot image.

Figure 5

Mutational analysis of the  is‐      chimera.

A. The panel shows the composite structural model of the full‐length     based on the full‐length   eisseria gonorrhoeae      structure (4 3 ) ( oinaj et al., 2013) and   scherichia coli      barrel structures (4 4 , 4 75) ( lbrecht et al., 2014;  i et al., 2014). The     and     structures (3 5) have been taken from ( atzeva‐ opalova et al., 2010). The positions of residues  370,  388 in     and  521 in turn  3 are shown.

B.   . coli   3 cells, carrying  is‐      chimeras cloned into p , were grown in  ennox broth supplemented with either arabinose (+  ra) or fructose (− ra).

C. Detection of  is‐      chimeras. The panel shows  estern blots of normalised total cellular protein from the  3 cells in panel B after 300 min of growth. Blots were probed with anti‐ is tag antiserum to detect  is‐    and the  is‐      chimeras, and anti‐  antiserum to detect  ,   and  . A non‐specific band is used as a loading control ( ).

D. The panel shows the potential    barrel interactions for   . gonorrhoeae      (blue) and the       chimera (blue and red). The location of residues  370 and  388 in     and  585 and  583 in turn  4 for     and the corresponding residues for     ( 388,  370,  585 and  583) are indicated.

E. The panel shows the possible    ‐barrel interactions for   . coli      (red) and the       chimera (blue and red). The location of  363 and  521 in     and  363 and  521 in    , are shown. Images were prepared using  ol (Schrodinger, 2010). Note, as some side‐chains are not present in the   crystal structures, their orientations have been extrapolated using most the frequent rotamers.

Figure 6

Rescue of   depletion by the   seudomonas aeruginosa    chimeras.

A. The panel shows the   . aeruginosa    chimeras used in this study. The   scherichia coli    domains are shown in orange, while   . aeruginosa    are shown by blue hashing. The   . coli    barrel is depicted as a grey rectangle.

B.   . coli   3 cells, carrying the   . aeruginosa    chimeras cloned into p  (see panel A), were grown in  ennox broth supplemented with either arabinose (+  ra) or fructose (− ra).

C. Detection of   . aeruginosa    chimeras. The panel shows  estern blots of normalised total cellular protein from  3 cells in panel B after 300 min of growth. Blots were probed with anti‐  . coli    antiserum to detect     and   . aeruginosa    chimeras, where possible. A non‐specific band is used as a loading control ( ).

D. Detection of   . aeruginosa    chimeras with anti‐  . aeruginosa    antiserum. The panel shows  estern blots of normalised total cellular protein from  3 cells in panel   after 300 min of growth. Blots were probed with anti‐  . aeruginosa    antiserum to detect the various   . aeruginosa    chimeras. A non‐specific band is used as a loading control ( ).

Figure 7

Mutational analysis of the       chimera.

A. A topology model of the   scherichia coli   ‐barrel ( 422 to  810) derived from the   . coli    crystal structure ( lbrecht et al., 2014). Amino acids within  ‐strand regions are shown as blue squares and those in external loops and periplasmic turns are shown as pink circles. Extracellular loops  1– 8 and periplasmic turns  1– 7 are indicated. The position of mutations, which enable the       chimera to rescue   depletion in  3 cells on agar plates, are red (see  able 1). The  470 ,  614 ,  614 ,  654  and  746  substitutions were cloned into a clean plasmid background and analysed further.

B.   . coli   3 cells, carrying       chimeras cloned into p , were grown in  ennox broth supplemented with either arabinose (+  ra) or fructose (− ra).

C. Detection of   . coli porins after   depletion. The panel shows  estern blots of normalised total cell protein from the  3 cells, carrying the various constructs in panel  , after 300 min of growth in  ennox broth supplemented with either arabinose (+  ra) or fructose (– ra). Blots were probed with anti‐  antiserum to detect  ,   and  , and a non‐specific band is used as a loading control ( ).

D. Detection of       chimeras using anti‐  seudomonas aeruginosa    antiserum. The panel shows  estern blots of normalised total cellular protein from  3 cells after 300 min of growth in the presence of arabinose (+  ra) or fructose (− ra). Blots were probed with anti‐  . aeruginosa    antiserum to detect the various       chimeras. A non‐specific band is used as a loading control ( ).

E. The panels shows a model of the   . coli   ‐barrel, based on the     barrel structure (4 4 ), where the missing  6 loop is replaced by  6 from the alternative     structure (4 75) and the missing  ‐terminal residues are modelled in ( lbrecht et al., 2014;  i et al., 2014). A larger internal view of the barrel, focusing on the juxtaposition of  1,  6 and  16 is shown. The location of mutations, which enable the       chimera to rescue   depletion in  3 cells on agar plates, is indicated (see  able 1). Images were prepared using  ol ( chrodinger, 2010).

