Lateral flow urine lipoarabinomannan assay for detecting active tuberculosis in HIV‐positive adults

Abstract

Background

Rapid detection of tuberculosis (TB) among people living with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is a global health priority. HIV‐associated TB may have different clinical presentations and is challenging to diagnose. Conventional sputum tests have reduced sensitivity in HIV‐positive individuals, who have higher rates of extrapulmonary TB compared with HIV‐negative individuals. The lateral flow urine lipoarabinomannan assay (LF‐LAM) is a new, commercially available point‐of‐care test that detects lipoarabinomannan (LAM), a lipopolysaccharide present in mycobacterial cell walls, in people with active TB disease.

Objectives

To assess the accuracy of LF‐LAM for the diagnosis of active TB disease in HIV‐positive adults who have signs and symptoms suggestive of TB (TB diagnosis). To assess the accuracy of LF‐LAM as a screening test for active TB disease in HIV‐positive adults irrespective of signs and symptoms suggestive of TB (TB screening).

Search methods

We searched the following databases without language restriction on 5 February 2015: the Cochrane Infectious Diseases Group Specialized Register; MEDLINE (PubMed,1966); EMBASE (OVID, from 1980); Science Citation Index Expanded (SCI‐EXPANDED, from 1900), Conference Proceedings Citation Index‐Science (CPCI‐S, from 1900), and BIOSIS Previews (from 1926) (all three using the Web of Science platform; MEDION; LILACS (BIREME, from 1982); SCOPUS (from 1995); the metaRegister of Controlled Trials (mRCT); the search portal of the World Health Organization International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (WHO ICTRP); and ProQuest Dissertations & Theses A&l (from 1861).

Selection criteria

Eligible study types included randomized controlled trials, cross‐sectional studies, and cohort studies that determined LF‐LAM accuracy for TB against a microbiological reference standard (culture or nucleic acid amplification test from any body site). A higher quality reference standard was one in which two or more specimen types were evaluated for TB, and a lower quality reference standard was one in which only one specimen type was evaluated for TB. Participants were HIV‐positive people aged 15 years and older.

Data collection and analysis

Two review authors independently extracted data from each included study using a standardized form. We appraised the quality of studies using the Quality Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies‐2 (QUADAS‐2) tool. We evaluated the test at two different cut‐offs: (grade 1 or 2, based on the reference card scale of five intensity bands). Most analyses used grade 2, the manufacturer's currently recommended cut‐off for positivity. We carried out meta‐analyses to estimate pooled sensitivity and specificity using a bivariate random‐effects model and estimated the models using a Bayesian approach. We determined accuracy of LF‐LAM combined with sputum microscopy or Xpert® MTB/RIF. In addition, we explored the influence of CD4 count on the accuracy estimates. We assessed the quality of the evidence using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) approach.

Main results

We included 12 studies: six studies evaluated LF‐LAM for TB diagnosis and six studies evaluated the test for TB screening. All studies were cross‐sectional or cohort studies. Studies for TB diagnosis were largely conducted among inpatients (median CD4 range 71 to 210 cells per µL) and studies for TB screening were largely conducted among outpatients (median CD4 range 127 to 437 cells per µL). All studies were conducted in low‐ or middle‐income countries. Only two studies for TB diagnosis (33%) and one study for TB screening (17%) used a higher quality reference standard.

LF‐LAM for TB diagnosis (grade 2 cut‐off): meta‐analyses showed median pooled sensitivity and specificity (95% credible interval (CrI)) of 45% (29% to 63%) and 92% (80% to 97%), (five studies, 2313 participants, 35% with TB, low quality evidence). The pooled sensitivity of a combination of LF‐LAM and sputum microscopy (either test positive) was 59% (47% to 70%), which represented a 19% (4% to 36%) increase over sputum microscopy alone, while the pooled specificity was 92% (73% to 97%), which represented a 6% (1% to 24%) decrease from sputum microscopy alone (four studies, 1876 participants, 38% with TB). The pooled sensitivity of a combination of LF‐LAM and sputum Xpert® MTB/RIF (either test positive) was 75% (61% to 87%) and represented a 13% (1% to 37%) increase over Xpert® MTB/RIF alone. The pooled specificity was 93% (81% to 97%) and represented a 4% (1% to 16%) decrease from Xpert® MTB/RIF alone (three studies, 909 participants, 36% with TB). Pooled sensitivity and specificity of LF‐LAM were 56% (41% to 70%) and 90% (81% to 95%) in participants with a CD4 count of less than or equal to 100 cells per µL (five studies, 859 participants, 47% with TB) versus 26% (16% to 46%) and 92% (78% to 97%) in participants with a CD4 count greater than 100 cells per µL (five studies, 1410 participants, 30% with TB).

LF‐LAM for TB screening (grade 2 cut‐off): for individual studies, sensitivity estimates (95% CrI) were 44% (30% to 58%), 28% (16% to 42%), and 0% (0% to 71%) and corresponding specificity estimates were 95% (92% to 97%), 94% (90% to 97%), and 95% (92% to 97%) (three studies, 1055 participants, 11% with TB, very low quality evidence). There were limited data for additional analyses.

The main limitations of the review were the use of a lower quality reference standard in most included studies, and the small number of studies and participants included in the analyses. The results should, therefore, be interpreted with caution.

Authors' conclusions

We found that LF‐LAM has low sensitivity to detect TB in adults living with HIV whether the test is used for diagnosis or screening. For TB diagnosis, the combination of LF‐LAM with sputum microscopy suggests an increase in sensitivity for TB compared to either test alone, but with a decrease in specificity. In HIV‐positive individuals with low CD4 counts who are seriously ill, LF‐LAM may help with the diagnosis of TB.

The lateral flow urine lipoarabinomannan (LF‐LAM) test for diagnosis of tuberculosis in people living with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)

 

Tuberculosis (TB) is a common cause of death in people with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, but diagnosis is difficult, and depends on testing for TB in the sputum and other sites, which may take weeks to give results. A rapid and accurate point‐of‐care test could reduce delays in diagnosis, allow treatment to start promptly, and improve linkage between diagnosis and treatment.

 

The lateral flow urine lipoarabinomannan assay (LF‐LAM, Alere DetermineTM TB LAM Ag, Alere Inc, Waltham, MA, USA) is a commercially available point‐of‐care test for active TB (pulmonary and extrapulmonary TB). The test detects lipoarabinomannan (LAM), a component of the bacterial cell walls, which is present in some people with active TB. The test is performed by placing urine on one end of a test strip, with results appearing as a line (that is, a band) on the strip if TB is present. The test is simple, requires no special equipment, and shows results in 25 minutes. During the period we conducted the review, the manufacturer issued new recommendations for defining a positive test. We collected data based on both the original and the new recommendations

 

We aimed to see how accurately LF‐LAM diagnosed TB in people living with HIV with TB symptoms, and how accurately LF‐LAM diagnosed TB in people living with HIV being screened for TB whether or not they had TB symptoms.

 

We examined evidence up to 5 February 2015 and included 12 studies: six studies evaluated LF‐LAM for TB diagnosis and six studies evaluated the test for TB screening. All studies were conducted in low‐ or middle‐income countries.

 

We assessed quality by describing how participants were selected for the studies, details of the test and reference standards (the benchmark test), and study flow and timing, using the standard QUADAS‐2 approach. Few studies used multiple types of specimens for the reference standard (higher quality standard) and most relied on sputum culture alone (lower quality standard), which may have affected results.

 

In a population of 1000 HIV‐positive individuals with TB symptoms, where 300 actually have TB, the test will correctly identify 135 people as having TB, but miss the remaining 165 people; for the 700 people who do not have TB, the test will correctly identify 644 people as not having TB, but will misclassify 56 as having TB.

The sensitivity of the test is higher in people living with HIV with low CD4 cell counts who are at risk of life‐threatening illnesses. In patients with a CD4 ≤ 100 cells per µL, LF‐LAM sensitivity was 56% (41% to 70%) versus 26% (16% to 46%) in patients with a CD4 count > 100 cells per µL.

If the test is used in screening HIV‐positive people for TB, in a population of 1000 where 10 actually have TB, LF‐LAM will correctly identify none of the 10, or up to four of the 10; on the other hand, the test will miss six to 10 people with TB; in the remaining 990 who do not have TB, the test will correctly identify 931 to 941 people as not having TB while misclassifying 49 to 59 as having TB.

 

The main limitations of the review were the use of a lower quality reference standard in most included studies, and small number of studies and participants included in the analyses. The results should, therefore, be interpreted with caution.

 

In this Cochrane review, we found that LF‐LAM, whether the test is used for diagnosis or screening, has low sensitivity to detect TB. However, in HIV‐positive people with low CD4 counts who are seriously ill, LF‐LAM may help with the diagnosis of TB.

Summary of findings

Summary of findings 1 LF‐LAM (grade 2) for TB diagnosis. 

Summary of findings 2 LF‐LAM (grade 2) for TB screening. 

Background

Target condition being diagnosed

Tuberculosis (TB) is caused by the mycobacterium Mycobacterium tuberculosis and is transmitted through respiratory aerosols produced by people with active TB disease. Infection can be asymptomatic for many years (referred to as latent TB infection), with bacteria persisting in a viable but minimally replicating state. In a small percentage of people, latent infection may reactivate at a later time in a process that is commonly characterized by an increase in the replication and number of bacteria, which leads to symptomatic 'active TB disease'. TB predominantly affects the lungs (pulmonary TB), but can also affect other parts of the body, such as the brain or spine (extrapulmonary TB). Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection is the most potent risk factor for progression from latent TB infection to active TB disease (Kwan 2011). In this systematic review we are interested in the diagnosis of active TB disease in people living with HIV.

Worldwide, in 2014, an estimated 1.2 million (12%) of the 9.6 million people who developed TB were HIV‐positive; 74% of these HIV‐positive TB cases were in the African Region (WHO Global Tuberculosis Report 2015). In 2014, TB killed 1.5 million people. The number of people dying from HIV‐associated TB has been falling since 2004 (570,000 deaths); however in 2014 an estimated 390,000 people died from HIV‐associated TB (WHO Global Tuberculosis Report 2015). TB is the leading cause of death among people living with HIV, estimated to account for around 33% of all HIV‐related deaths globally (WHO Global Tuberculosis Report 2015). However, a recent systematic review of the prevalence of TB identified at autopsy suggests that, in resource‐limited settings, TB is responsible for an even higher percentage (around 37% ) of all HIV‐related deaths (Gupta 2015). Most deaths from TB are preventable. It is estimated that 43 million lives were saved between 2000 and 2014 through effective diagnosis and treatment (WHO Global Tuberculosis Report 2015).

TB and HIV are linked by geography and biology, and their intersection has been called a "synergy from hell" (Bartlett 2007). Geographically, HIV and TB are often concentrated in areas of poverty with limited resources for diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of TB. Much of the global burden of TB is concentrated in sub‐Saharan Africa, and HIV coinfection represents a major driver of the epidemic in many areas. Linked by biology, each disease speeds the progress of the other. The risk of developing TB is much higher in people living with HIV, estimated to be 20 to 37 times higher in HIV‐positive individuals than in HIV‐negative individuals (Getahun 2010). TB occurs early in the course of HIV infection and shortens survival (Havlir 2008; Whalen 1995). Many HIV‐positive people in developing countries develop TB as the first manifestation of AIDS (WHO Global Tuberculosis Report 2015).

Signs and symptoms of TB in people living with HIV vary, which makes it challenging to determine when to consider a diagnosis of TB. Fever, weight loss, and fatigue are often the only symptoms of HIV‐associated TB and are non‐specific. As a result, testing may be delayed while other causes are evaluated. A cough for longer than two weeks is a common distinguishing feature that prompts diagnostic testing for TB in people who are HIV‐negative, but is present in less than a third of people with TB who are HIV positive (Cain 2010). Similarly, radiographic features of TB in people living with HIV can be misleading or atypical. Whereas upper lobe cavitary lesions are often seen in HIV‐negative TB patients, such lesions are less common in HIV‐positive TB patients. In comparison with HIV‐negative people, HIV‐positive people also have higher rates of extrapulmonary TB or mycobacteraemia (TB bloodstream infection). Extrapulmonary TB presentation varies depending on the body site affected, and can mimic other diseases such as cancer and bacterial and fungal infections. Identifying people who warrant further testing for TB may therefore be challenging in HIV‐positive people.

Even when TB is suspected, current diagnostic approaches are inadequate. Sputum smear microscopy is the most widely utilized TB diagnostic test worldwide. It has low sensitivity for TB (50% to 60% on average) and identifies less than 50% of people with HIV‐related TB (Siddiqi 2003). Sputum smear microscopy does not, by definition, identify smear‐negative pulmonary or extrapulmonary TB, which are more common in people who are HIV‐positive than HIV‐negative (Getahun 2007; Perkins 2007; Steingart 2006). Mycobacterial culture, the reference standard for TB, is costly, requires significant laboratory infrastructure, takes weeks to provide results, and is not widely available. Detection of extrapulmonary TB is dependent on intensive evaluation of sites of disease and culture of clinical specimens other than sputum, in conjunction with clinical and radiographic evaluations. Hence, many people with TB remain undiagnosed if co‐infected with HIV.

Recently, a new test has become available for TB detection. The Xpert® MTB/RIF assay (Cepheid, Sunnyvale, USA) is a fully automated, nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT) for TB and drug‐resistant TB and is endorsed by the World Health Organization (WHO) (WHO Xpert® Policy Update 2013). A recent Cochrane Review found that Xpert® MTB/RIF was sensitive and specific for both TB detection and rifampicin resistance detection and, compared with smear microscopy, substantially increased TB detection among culture‐confirmed cases (Steingart 2014). Although sputum testing with Xpert® MTB/RIF has high sensitivity for smear‐positive pulmonary TB (98%), sensitivity is lower for smear‐negative pulmonary TB (67%) (Steingart 2014). This finding has bearing for HIV‐associated TB where smear‐negative TB and extrapulmonary TB are disproportionately higher.

Index test(s)

The lateral flow urine lipoarabinomannan assay (LF‐LAM) is a commercially available point‐of‐care test for active TB (Alere DetermineTM TB LAM Ag, Alere Inc, Waltham, MA, USA). The test detects lipoarabinomannan (LAM), a lipopolysaccharide present in mycobacterial cell walls, which is released from metabolically active or degenerating bacterial cells and appears to be present only in people with active TB disease.

LAM is detectable in the urine of people with active TB (Peter 2010). Urine‐based testing has advantages over sputum‐based testing because urine is easy to collect and store, and lacks the infection control risks associated with sputum collection. Several studies (Dheda 2010; Lawn 2009; Lawn 2012a; Lawn 2012b; Peter 2012; Shah 2009) and a meta‐analysis of an earlier generation LAM‐ELISA test (Minion 2011) have found that the accuracy of urinary LAM detection may be improved among people living with HIV with advanced immunosuppression. Several hypotheses may explain the higher sensitivity of urine LAM detection in HIV‐positive people including higher bacillary burden and antigen load, greater likelihood of genitourinary tract TB involvement, and greater glomerular permeability to allow increased antigen levels in urine (Minion 2011).

LF‐LAM is performed manually by applying 60 µL of urine to the DetermineTM TB LAM Ag test strip and incubating at room temperature for 25 minutes (Alere 2014). The strip is then inspected by eye. The intensity of any visible band on the test strip is graded by comparing it with the intensities of the bands on a manufacturer‐supplied reference card. Prior to January 2014, this reference card included five bands (grade 1 representing a very low intensity band to grade 5 representing a high/dark intensity band). Some studies prior to January 2014 utilized grade 1 as the threshold for test positivity, while other studies utilized grade 2 as the positivity threshold. After January 2014, the manufacturer revised the reference card to have four reference bands, such that the band intensity for the new grade 1 corresponded to the band intensity for the previous grade 2. Under manufacturer recommendations (using the new reference card), bands that are grade 1 or higher are considered positive (Figure 1).

Clinical pathway

The WHO guidelines on intensified case‐finding in people living with HIV recommend that, in resource‐constrained settings, people living with HIV who report "any one of the symptoms of current cough, fever, weight loss, or night sweats should be evaluated for TB and other diseases" (Getahun 2011; WHO Tuberculosis Screening 2013). Further diagnostic work‐up for people with a positive symptom screen includes sputum smear microscopy, and, in some settings, sputum Xpert® MTB/RIF or mycobacterial culture (WHO Tuberculosis Screening 2013). Importantly, some HIV‐positive people may have difficulty producing any sputum at all, or may have extrapulmonary forms of TB. When extrapulmonary TB is suspected, it is standard practice to obtain "appropriate specimens from the suspected sites of involvement for microscopy, culture, and histopathological examination" (TB CARE I 2014). Evaluation for extrapulmonary TB often requires invasive diagnostic procedures that may have low yield even in people with advanced disease.

People living with HIV are at increased risk of TB but may be asymptomatic. As such, urine LF‐LAM could also be used to screen for TB in people living with HIV, irrespective of symptoms. The WHO defines screening for active TB as "the systematic identification of people with suspected active TB, in a predetermined target group, using tests, examinations or other procedures that can be rapidly applied" (WHO Tuberculosis Screening 2013).

LF‐LAM could be used as either (1) a replacement test for an existing test (that is, sputum smear microscopy or sputum Xpert® MTB/RIF), or (2) a parallel test, i.e. a 'new test' intended to be used concurrently in combination with an existing test.

Alternative test(s)

We evaluated the performance of LF‐LAM in comparison to or in combination with sputum smear microscopy or sputum Xpert® MTB/RIF. Sputum smear microscopy involves the microscopic evaluation of sputum specimens using stains for acid‐fast bacilli that identify mycobacteria (but do not distinguish M. tuberculosis from nontuberculous mycobacteria). Xpert® MTB/RIF is a semi‐automated integrated specimen processing and NAAT for detection of TB and rifampicin resistance.

Rationale

New tests and strategies for detection of TB are urgently needed to curb the ongoing HIV‐TB co‐epidemic. Among the key priorities identified by the WHO, healthcare providers, patients, and advocacy groups is development of a point‐of‐care test for TB (Batz 2011; Pai 2012; Weyer 2011). LF‐LAM, if sufficiently accurate, would satisfy many of the established minimum specifications for a point‐of‐care test for TB (Appendix 1; Batz 2011). Furthermore, the test could provide obvious benefits for HIV‐positive people who suffer the highest morbidity and mortality, by earlier detection of pulmonary TB that may be missed by sputum smear microscopy and sputum Xpert® MTB/RIF and extrapulmonary TB that may be missed by sputum‐based testing. The draft of this systematic review informed the WHO policy recommendations on the use of LF‐LAM for the diagnosis and screening of active TB in people living with HIV (WHO Lipoarabinomannan Policy Guidance 2015).

Objectives

Primary objectives

To assess the accuracy of lateral flow urine lipoarabinomannan assay (LF‐LAM) for the diagnosis of active tuberculosis (TB) disease in HIV‐positive adults who have signs and symptoms suggestive of TB.. To assess the accuracy of the LF‐LAM as a screening test for active TB disease in HIV‐positive adults irrespective of signs and symptoms suggestive of TB. 

Secondary objectives

To compare the diagnostic accuracy of LF‐LAM and existing tests, sputum smear microscopy or sputum Xpert® MTB/RIF, as well as determine the diagnostic accuracy of LF‐LAM when added to existing tests.. To investigate heterogeneity of test accuracy in the included studies. Possible sources of heterogeneity include CD4 count and clinical setting (inpatient versus outpatient setting). 

Methods

Criteria for considering studies for this review

Types of studies

We included primary studies that evaluated the accuracy of LF‐LAM for diagnosis of or screening for active TB in people living with HIV and compared the index test with a defined reference standard. We also included studies that assessed the diagnostic accuracy of one of the alternative tests (sputum microscopy or sputum Xpert® MTB/RIF) in addition to LF‐LAM. Eligible study types included randomized controlled trials, cross‐sectional studies, and observational cohort studies. We included abstracts with sufficient data. We excluded case‐control studies.

We included studies that provided data from which we could extract true positive (TP), false positive (FP), true negative (TN), and false negative (FN) values, based on one of the reference standards defined below.

Participants

Participants were adults (15 years and older is considered 'adult' for purpose of TB surveillance) and who were HIV positive. We included participants in whom there was a suspicion of TB based on the presence of signs and symptoms compatible with TB, as well as participants who may or may not have had signs and symptoms compatible with TB and had not been previously evaluated for TB. Signs and symptoms of TB include cough, fever, weight loss, and night sweats.

Index tests

The index test was Alere DetermineTM TB LAM Ag test (LF‐LAM, Alere Inc., Waltham, MA, USA), the only commercial lateral flow urine LAM assay available as of December 2015. We evaluated the test at two different cut‐off values for positivity (grade 1 and grade 2) based on the original manufacturer reference card. Grade 2 (corresponding to grade 1 on the new manufacturer reference card) is the currently recommended threshold for positivity.

Target conditions

The target condition was active TB disease, which includes pulmonary and extrapulmonary TB.

Reference standards

We required studies to diagnose TB using at least one of the following two reference standards.

Microbiological reference standard:. we defined 'TB' as a positive M. tuberculosis culture or nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT);. we defined 'not TB' as a negative M. tuberculosis culture and NAAT (if performed).. Composite reference standard that included M. tuberculosis culture together with at least one of the following components: NAAT, smear, or clinical findings:. we defined 'TB' as (1) a positive culture, or (2) a positive NAAT, or (3) a positive smear, or (4) a clinical decision to start TB treatment, and, after at least one month of follow‐up, the participant was diagnosed as having TB;. we defined 'not TB' as a negative culture and NAAT (if performed), no TB treatment given, and resolution of signs and symptoms at follow‐up. 

NAATs included: Enhanced Amplified Mycobacterium Tuberculosis Direct Test (E‐MTD, Gen‐Probe, San Diego, USA); Amplicor Mycobacterium tuberculosis Test (Amplicor, Roche Diagnostics, Basel, Switzerland); COBAS® TaqMan® MTB Test (Roche Diagnostics); GenoType MTBDRplus (HAIN Lifescieces, Nehren, Germany); and Xpert® MTB/RIF assay (Cepheid, Sunnyvale, USA).

For a microbiological reference standard, we considered a higher quality reference standard to be one in which two or more specimen types were evaluated for TB diagnosis and a lower quality reference standard to be one in which only one specimen type was evaluated for TB diagnosis. For a composite reference standard, we did not require all components to be provided on all participants.

Of note, we excluded sputum smear from a composite reference standard and sputum Xpert® MTB/RIF from both a microbiological and a composite reference standard for the purpose of performing analyses of LF‐LAM in combination with either sputum smear or sputum Xpert® MTB/RIF.

We excluded participants as 'unclassifiable' if we could not classify them as either 'TB' or 'not TB' based on these reference standard definitions.

We consider that there are strengths and limitations to each reference standard. A microbiological reference standard, primarily culture, is considered the best reference standard. We expected all studies to obtain sputum specimens and some studies to obtain additional specimens for culture. However, the primary concern with relying on sputum culture alone is that people with TB disease may be missed for the following reasons: HIV‐positive people may not be able to provide sputum specimens of sufficient quality; sputum bacillary load is typically low in people living with HIV; and a substantial proportion of people with HIV‐associated TB cannot produce sputum at all (Lawn 2013a) or have extrapulmonary TB without pulmonary TB. This means that index test TPs may be misclassified as FPs by sputum culture. Therefore, when evaluating LF‐LAM with respect to sputum culture, the number of FPs (classified as positive by the index test and negative by the reference test) may be increased and LF‐LAM specificity may be underestimated (Lawn 2015). This misclassification may also lead to underestimation of sensitivity. Increasing the sensitivity of the reference standard by evaluating multiple specimens, including evaluating specimens from sites of disease for extrapulmonary TB, may reduce the number of cases of TB disease incorrectly classified as 'not TB' by culture.

In contrast, a composite reference standard that includes microbiological or clinical components may correctly classify index test results as TPs (instead of as FPs with respect to culture), especially in people with paucibacillary disease in whom culture may be negative. However, because of the uncertainties that surround a clinical diagnosis of TB, a reference standard that uses clinical TB (in culture‐negative people) is considered a lower quality reference standard and may incorrectly classify people without TB as having TB.

Search methods for identification of studies

Electronic searches

To identify all relevant studies, on 5 February 2015, Vittoria Lutje (VL), the Information Specialist for the Cochrane Infectious Diseases Group (CIDG), performed literature searches without language restrictions in the following databases using the search terms we have reported in Appendix 2: the Cochrane Infectious Diseases Group Specialized Register; MEDLINE (PubMed, from 1966); EMBASE (OVID, from 1980); Science Citation Index Expanded (SCI‐EXPANDED, from 1900), Conference Proceedings Citation Index‐ Science (CPCI‐S, from 1900), and BIOSIS Previews (from 1926), all three using the Web of Science platform; MEDION ( ); LILACS (BIREME, from 1982); and SCOPUS (from 1995). She also searched the metaRegister of Controlled Trials (mRCT) and the search portal of the WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (WHO ICTRP,  ) to identify ongoing trials, and ProQuest Dissertations & Theses A&l (from 1861) to identify relevant dissertations.

Searching other resources

We examined reference lists of relevant reviews and studies, searched the WHO websites, and contacted Alere Inc. and researchers in the field to identify ongoing studies.

Data collection and analysis

Selection of studies

Two review authors (MS and CH) first independently examined all titles and abstracts identified from the electronic search to determine potentially eligible studies. We then obtained the full‐text articles of these potentially eligible studies and the same two review authors independently assessed inclusion based on predefined inclusion and exclusion criteria. We resolved disagreements through discussion and, if necessary, consulted a third review author (KRS).

Data extraction and management

We developed a standardized data extraction form and piloted the form on two of the included studies. Based upon the results of the pilot, we finalized the form. Then two review authors (MS and CH) independently extracted data from each included study on the following characteristics.

Author, publication year, study design, country(ies), clinical setting (outpatient or inpatient).. Participants: age, gender, CD4 count, clinical status (asymptomatic, symptomatic).. Quality Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies‐2 (QUADAS‐2) items.. Cut‐off used for determining a positive index test result, grade 1 or 2.. Reference standard(s).. Number of true positive (TP), false negative (FN), false positive (FP), and true negative (TN) values and for the index test, sputum microscopy, and sputum Xpert® MTB/RIF.. Missing or unavailable test results.. Intra‐reader and inter‐reader variability.. Participant health outcomes: time to treatment initiation (time from specimen collection until time the participant starts treatment), morbidity, and mortality. 

We assigned country income status (high‐income, or low‐ and middle‐income) as classified by the World Bank List of Economies (World Bank 2014).

For one study that reported results using the new reference card (LaCourse 2015), we converted results to the original manufacturer scale to allow consistent comparisons.

For a composite reference standard, we found that these data were largely unavailable in the publications and interpreted differently by study authors. Therefore, we sent our definition of a composite reference standard to study authors and requested that they provide TP, FP, FN, and TP values using our definition. Furthermore, we excluded participants assigned to 'TB' and 'not TB' if study authors considered clinical findings alone and there was not at least one month of follow‐up. Participants may be lost during follow‐up for unknown reasons or death. We excluded these participants because we could not accurately classify their TB status.

If a study applied an approach of testing all participants in the inpatient setting, we assigned the purpose of testing as 'diagnosis', rather than screening. We made this assignment because we considered it likely that most inpatients had TB symptoms even though they were not enrolled in the study on the basis of specific TB symptoms.

We contacted study authors for missing data and clarifications and entered all data into Microsoft® Excel.

The data extraction form is in Appendix 3.

Assessment of methodological quality

We used the QUADAS‐2 tool to assess the quality of the included studies (Whiting 2011; Appendix 4). QUADAS‐2 consists of four domains: patient selection, index test, reference standard, and flow and timing (flow and timing domain includes differential verification of TB status for study participants). We assessed all domains for risk of bias and the first three domains for concerns regarding applicability. As recommended, we first developed guidance on how to appraise each question and interpreted this information tailored to this review. Then, one review author (MS) piloted the tool with two of the included studies. Based on the experience we gained from the pilot, we finalized the tool. Two review authors (MS and CH) independently completed QUADAS‐2. We resolved disagreements through discussion or consulted a third review author (KRS). We presented the results of the quality assessment in the text, the 'Characteristics of included studies' table, and graphs.

Statistical analysis and data synthesis

We performed descriptive analyses of the characteristics of the included studies using Stata 13 (StataCorp 2011), and presented key study characteristics in the 'Characteristics of included studies' table. We used the number of TPs, FPs, FNs, and TNs to calculate the individual study estimates of sensitivity and specificity and their 95% confidence intervals (CI). We presented individual study results graphically by plotting the estimates of sensitivity and specificity (and their 95% CIs) in forest plots and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) space using Review Manager (RevMan) (Review Manager). We presented the results from all studies using the original manufacturer scale for test interpretation, with band intensities graded on a scale of 1 to 5 (from lightest to darkest). The newer manufacturer reference card is graded on a scale of 1 to 4, with lightest band intensity (grade 1) corresponding to the prior grade 2. To allow consistent comparisons, we converted results from studies utilizing the newer manufacturer reference card to the original manufacturer scale (that is, 'grade 1' results using the new scale are treated in this review as 'grade 2').

As mentioned above, during the period in which we conducted the review, the manufacturer issued new recommendations for defining a positive test. Although, we determined accuracy estimates separately at the original (grade 1) and currently recommended (grade 2) cut‐offs and present the estimates in forest plots and tables, we focused our attention in the main text on the diagnostic accuracy of grade 2.

We used a microbiological reference standard for most analyses. We grouped studies according to the purpose of testing, diagnosis, or screening. Then, when we considered the studies to be comparable, we carried out meta‐analyses to estimate LF‐LAM pooled sensitivity and specificity with a bivariate random‐effects model (Chu 2009; Reitsma 2005). This approach allowed us to calculate pooled sensitivity and specificity while dealing with potential sources of variation caused by: (1) imprecision of sensitivity and specificity estimates within individual studies; (2) correlation between sensitivity and specificity across studies; and (3) variation in sensitivity and specificity between studies.

We compared the sensitivity and specificity of LF‐LAM when performed alone, with the sensitivity and specificity of sputum smear microscopy or sputum Xpert® MTB/RIF in direct comparisons in which both tests were evaluated in the same participants. We additionally determined the value of LF‐LAM when used as a parallel test in combination with sputum microscopy or sputum Xpert® MTB/RIF based on data from studies that reported results of LF‐LAM and either or both of these tests. To illustrate, for LF‐LAM used as a parallel test, we determined the increase in sensitivity of a combination of LF‐LAM and (1) sputum microscopy or (2) sputum Xpert® MTB/RIF compared with the sensitivity of sputum smear microscopy or sputum Xpert® MTB/RIF alone. We determined the potential decrease in specificity of a combination of LF‐LAM and (1) sputum microscopy or (2) sputum Xpert® MTB/RIF compared with the specificity of sputum microscopy or sputum Xpert® MTB/RIF alone. In these meta‐analyses, we accounted for conditional dependence between the accuracy estimates of LF‐LAM and the comparator test (sputum microscopy, or sputum Xpert® MTB/RIF, or a combination of LF‐LAM with sputum microscopy or sputum Xpert® MTB/RIF) by extending the standard bivariate model to include separate study‐level covariance terms (Novielli 2013; Vacek 1985) between the sensitivities of the two tests, for example, Xpert® MTB/RIF and LF‐LAM. We did not add covariance terms between the specificities, which were generally very high for all tests.

We estimated all models using a Bayesian approach implemented using WinBUGS (Lunn 2000). Under the Bayesian approach, all unknown parameters must be provided a prior distribution that defines the range of possible values of the parameter and the weight of each of those values, based on information external to the data. In order to let the observed data dominate the final results, we chose to use low‐information prior distributions. We defined prior distributions on the log‐odds scale over the pooled sensitivity and specificity parameters, their corresponding between‐study standard deviations (SDs) and the correlation between the sensitivities and specificities across studies. For the pooled log odds of the sensitivity or log odds of the specificity, we used a normal prior distribution with mean 0 and a wide variance of 4 (or a precision of 0.25). This corresponds to a roughly uniform distribution over the pooled sensitivity and pooled specificity on the probability scale. For the between‐study precision we used a gamma distribution with a shape parameter of two and rate parameter of 0.5. This corresponds to a 95% prior credible interval (CrI) for the between‐study SD in the log odds of sensitivity or log odds of specificity ranging from roughly 0.29 to 1.44, corresponding to moderate to high values of between‐study heterogeneity. Covariance terms followed a uniform prior distribution whose upper and lower limits were determined by the sensitivity of the two tests. We have summarized the models we used (including the prior distributions) and the WinBUGS programs we used to estimate them in Appendix 5.

We had two instances where there were only three included studies in the meta‐analysis, which led the model to be just identified and highly dependent on the prior information. Nonetheless, we chose not to simplify the bivariate to a univariate model in these cases as we wished to estimate the incremental value of one test over another by taking the difference between parameters in these two meta‐analysis models. Bivariate models are preferable for such comparisons Trikalinos 2014.

Meta‐analysis models based on few studies are sensitive to the choice of prior distributions, particularly the prior distributions over the between‐study SD parameters. To study the sensitivity of all our results to the choice of prior distributions given above, we considered alternative prior distributions that were less informative, which allowed a wider range of possible values. We increased the variance of the normal distributions over the pooled log odds of the sensitivity or specificity to 100. We used a uniform prior distribution ranging from zero to three over the between‐study SD on the log odds scale. We found that the pooled estimates remained roughly the same with these alternative priors, though the posterior CrIs were wider, as expected.

We combined information from the prior distribution with the likelihood of the observed data, in accordance with Bayes’ theorem in the WinBUGS program, which resulted in a sample from the posterior distribution of each unknown parameter. Using this sample, we calculated various descriptive statistics of interest. We estimated the median pooled sensitivity and specificity and their 95% CrI. The median or the 50% quantile is the value below which 50% of the posterior sample lies. We reported the median because the posterior distributions of some parameters may be skewed and the median would be considered a better point estimate of the unknown parameter than the mean in such cases. The 95% CrI is the Bayesian equivalent of the classical (frequentist) 95% CI (we indicated 95% CI for individual study estimates and 95% CrI for pooled study estimates as appropriate). The 95% CrI may be interpreted as an interval that has a 95% probability of capturing the true value of the unknown parameter given the observed data and the prior information.

To compare tests, we first defined the difference in the pooled sensitivity and the difference in the pooled specificity. Once the posterior distribution of the difference in sensitivities between two tests is available, we can estimate the probability that this difference exceeds zero.

Approach to uninterpretable LF‐LAM results

We excluded uninterpretable test results from the analyses for determination of sensitivity and specificity. We summarized uninterpretable results as reported by the included studies.

Investigations of heterogeneity

Initially, we investigated heterogeneity through visual examination of forest plots of sensitivities and specificities and through visual examination of the ROC plot of the raw data. When data were sufficient, we performed subgroup analyses with the following categorical covariates: CD4 count (> 200 versus ≤ 200 cells per µL; > 100 versus ≤ 100 cells per µL ; and > 50 versus ≤ 50 cells per µL) and clinical setting (inpatient versus outpatient). We generated the plots depicting the pooled results within CD4 count categories using R (R Statistical Computing 2015).

Sensitivity analyses

For our primary analysis using a microbiological reference standard, we performed sensitivity analyses by limiting inclusion in the meta‐analysis to the following.

Studies that avoided inappropriate exclusions, for example, studies that included participants who could not produce sputum. For this analysis we included studies that we scored as 'yes' for the QUADAS‐2 question, "Did the study avoid inappropriate exclusions?" (low risk of bias for participant selection).. Studies in which two or more specimen types were evaluated for TB diagnosis. For this analysis, we included studies that we scored as ‘yes’ for the QUADAS‐2 question, “Is the reference standard likely to correctly classify the target condition” (low risk of bias for the reference standard). 

Additional analyses

We extracted data on intra‐ and inter‐reader variability. Within the included studies, we recorded whether there was an association between LF‐LAM results and disease severity or mortality. We had intended to describe the effect of LF‐LAM implementation (that is, LF‐LAM used versus LF‐LAM not used) on patient important outcomes; however, there were limited data to do this.

Assessment of reporting bias

We did not carry out a formal assessment of publication bias using methods such as funnel plots or regression tests because such techniques have not been helpful for diagnostic test accuracy studies (Macaskill 2010). However, with our extensive outreach to researchers, we believe reporting bias to be minimal.

Assessment of the quality of the evidence

We assessed the quality of the evidence using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) approach (Schünemann 2008; Schünemann 2013). As recommended, we rated the quality of evidence as either high (not downgraded), moderate (downgraded by one level), low (downgraded by two levels), or very low (downgraded by more than two levels) based on five domains: risk of bias, indirectness, inconsistency, imprecision, and publication bias. For each outcome, the quality of evidence started as high when there were high quality observational studies (cross‐sectional or cohort studies) that enrolled participants with diagnostic uncertainty. If we found a reason for downgrading, we used our judgement to classify the reason as either serious (downgraded by one level) or very serious (downgraded by two levels).

Four review authors (MS, CH, ND, and KRS) discussed judgments and applied GRADE in the following way:

Risk of bias: we used QUADAS‐2 to assess risk of bias.. Indirectness: we considered indirectness from the perspective of test accuracy. We used QUADAS‐2 for concerns of applicability and looked for important differences between the populations studied (for example, in the spectrum of disease), the setting, and the review questions.. Inconsistency: GRADE recommends downgrading for unexplained inconsistency in sensitivity and specificity estimates. We carried out pre‐specified analyses to investigate potential sources of heterogeneity and did not downgrade when we felt we could explain inconsistency in the accuracy estimates.. Imprecision: we considered a precise estimate to be one that would allow a clinically meaningful decision. We considered the width of the CrI, and asked ourselves, “Would we make a different decision if the lower or upper boundary of the CrI represented the truth?” In addition, we worked out projected ranges for TP, FN, TN, and FP for a given prevalence of TB and made judgements on imprecision from these calculations.. Publication bias: we rated publication bias as undetected (not serious) for several reasons including the comprehensiveness of the literature search, communication with Alere, the test manufacturer, and extensive outreach to TB researchers to identify studies. 

Results

Results of the search

Our search yielded 2409 records. We identified four additional studies through contact with experts. After we removed duplicates, we identified 910 records. We excluded 842 records based on a review of title, or abstract, or both. We retrieved 68 full‐text articles, of which we excluded 55 studies for the following reasons: index test not evaluated (33 studies); insufficient data (lack of sufficient data to derive 2 x 2 tables or assess test performance in participants with and without TB) or duplicate data (15 studies); and editorials, reviews, or comments (seven studies). In addition, we excluded one ongoing study (Grant ongoing) which remained unpublished as of December 2015. Therefore, we included 12 unique studies in this review (Andrews 2014; Balcha 2014; Bjerrum 2015; Drain 2014b; Drain 2014a; Drain 2014c; LaCourse 2015; Lawn 2012a; Lawn 2014a; Nakiyingi 2014; Peter 2012a; Peter 2015). We listed the excluded studies and reasons for their exclusion in the 'Characteristics of excluded studies' section. Figure 2 shows the flow of studies in the review.

All included studies were performed in low‐ or middle‐income countries. We noted substantial differences in the included studies for the following characteristics: purpose for which lateral flow urine lipoarabinomannan assay (LF‐LAM) was applied (diagnosis versus screening); setting (inpatient versus outpatient); threshold used to define LF‐LAM positivity (grade 1 versus grade 2); inclusion and exclusion of participants based on whether or not they could produce sputum and whether or not they received an evaluation for extrapulmonary TB; and type of reference standard (microbiological versus composite reference standard) (see the 'Characteristics of included studies' section).

Methodological quality of included studies

For the purpose of TB diagnosis, six studies contributed data (Figure 3). In the patient selection domain, we considered two studies (33%) to be at high risk of bias because: (1) the study excluded all smear‐positive participants (Drain 2014c); (2) the study excluded participants who were unable to expectorate sputum (Peter 2015). All studies were cross‐sectional or cohort studies. Regarding applicability (i.e. Are there concerns that the included patients do not match the review question?), we judged that all studies included the appropriate participants and settings.

In the index test domain, we considered all studies to be at low risk of bias, as all studies used LF‐LAM, pre‐specified the grade used for positivity, and interpreted the test without knowledge of the results of the reference standard. In addition, we considered the conduct and interpretation of the index test to be of low concern for applicability in all included studies.

In the reference standard domain, we considered four studies (66%) to be at high risk of bias because: (1) the study only conducted mycobacterial blood culture as the reference standard without testing of respiratory specimens (Andrews 2014); (2) the studies did not include testing of extrapulmonary specimens (Drain 2014c; Peter 2015); and (3) health providers selected the sites for testing based on their own clinical suspicion (Peter 2012a). In terms of applicability, we deemed one study at high concern because of a lack of study directed testing (Peter 2012a). In this study health providers selected the sites for testing based on their own clinical suspicion, and it was unclear if their choice of reference standard would correctly classify TB.

In the flow and timing domain, we considered one study (17%) to be at high risk of bias because not all participants received the same reference standard (Peter 2012a). We judged the remaining studies to be at low risk of bias because all participants received the index test and the same reference standard and no participants were excluded from the 2 x 2 table.

For the purpose of TB screening, six studies contributed data (Figure 4). In the patient selection domain, we considered two studies (33%) to be at high risk of bias because these studies excluded participants who were unable to expectorate sputum and made no attempts at sputum induction (Balcha 2014; Bjerrum 2015). All studies were cross‐sectional or cohort studies. Regarding applicability, we judged that all studies (100%) included the appropriate participants and settings.

In the index test domain, we considered all studies at low risk of bias as all studies used LF‐LAM, pre‐specified the grade used for positivity, and interpreted the test without knowledge of the results of the reference standard. We considered the test conduct and interpretation in all studies (100%) to be applicable.

In the reference standard domain, we considered five studies (83%) to be at high risk of bias because these studies did not conduct microbiological testing on extrapulmonary specimens (Bjerrum 2015; Drain 2014a; Drain 2014b; LaCourse 2015; Lawn 2012a). We judged these studies to be of low concern in terms of applicability.

In the flow and timing domain, we considered one study (17%) to be at high risk of bias because not all participants received the same reference standard (Balcha 2014). We considered five studies (83%) to be of low risk of bias because all participants received the index test and the same reference standard and no participants were excluded from the 2 x 2 table.

Findings

Table 1 LF‐LAM pooled sensitivity and specificity for TB diagnosis, by grade. We present pooled sensitivity and specificity of LF‐LAM (grade 1 and grade 2) for TB diagnosis in Table 4.

LF‐LAM for TB diagnosis among participants with signs or symptoms of TB

Six studies evaluated the accuracy of LF‐LAM for TB diagnosis in participants with signs and symptoms suggestive of TB (Andrews 2014; Drain 2014c; Lawn 2014a; Nakiyingi 2014; Peter 2012a; Peter 2015). All studies provided data at grade 1 (2402 participants; 876 with TB) and five (83%) provided data at grade 2 (2313 participants; 819 with TB). The median CD4 cell count in these studies ranged from 71 to 210 cells per µL. Three studies (50%) were conducted exclusively in an inpatient setting (Andrews 2014; Lawn 2014a; Peter 2012a), one study was conducted exclusively in an outpatient setting (Peter 2015), and two studies were conducted in both inpatient and outpatient settings (Nakiyingi 2014;Drain 2014c).

LF‐LAM (grade 2), microbiological reference standard

In the analysis of LF‐LAM (grade 2) for TB diagnosis with respect to a microbiological reference standard, we included five studies that included 2313 HIV‐positive participants, 819 (35%) with TB (Andrews 2014; Lawn 2014a; Nakiyingi 2014; Peter 2012a; Peter 2015). Sensitivity estimates ranged from 23% to 84%, and specificity estimates from 75% to 99% (Figure 5). Sensitivity was lowest in Peter 2015. Differences between this study and the other studies in this analysis included setting (outpatient only), focus on pulmonary TB (no extrapulmonary samples were taken), and exclusion of participants unable to produce sputum. The pooled sensitivity and specificity (95% CrI) were 45% (29% to 63%) and 92% (80% to 97%).

LF‐LAM (grade 1), microbiological reference standard

In the analysis of LF‐LAM (grade 1) for TB diagnosis, with respect to a microbiological reference standard, we included six studies involving 2402 HIV‐positive patients, 876 (36%) with TB (Andrews 2014; Drain 2014c; Lawn 2014a; Nakiyingi 2014; Peter 2012a; Peter 2015). Sensitivity estimates ranged from 38% to 100% and specificity estimates, from 50% to 95% (Figure 5). Sensitivity was lowest in Peter 2015 as discussed above for LF‐LAM (grade 2). Specificity was lowest in Andrews 2014, which was notable for the lack of microbiological testing beyond mycobacterial blood culture and may have led to misclassification of some participants with TB as ‘not TB’. The pooled sensitivity and specificity (95% CrI) were 59% (43% to 77%) and 78% (64% to 88%).

LF‐LAM (grade 2), composite reference standard

Three studies evaluated LF‐LAM (grade 2) for TB diagnosis, with respect to a composite reference standard (Nakiyingi 2014; Peter 2012a; Peter 2015). In these studies, we considered 270 participants to be ‘unclassifiable’ (54 LF‐LAM‐positive; 216 LF‐LAM‐negative). Sensitivity estimates ranged from 11% to 45% and specificity estimates ranged from 96% to 98% (Figure 6).

LF‐LAM (grade 2) and existing tests

LF‐LAM versus sputum microscopy

Four studies including 1876 participants (708 (38%) with TB), directly compared LF‐LAM and sputum microscopy in the same patients (Lawn 2014a; Nakiyingi 2014; Peter 2012a; Peter 2015). (We classified participants unable to produce sputum as negative by sputum testing). Pooled sensitivities were similar, 38% (34% to 42%) for LF‐LAM and 40% (27% to 54%) for sputum microscopy. Pooled specificity was 95% (94% to 97%) for LF‐LAM and 98% (93% to 100%) for sputum microscopy (Figure 7).

LF‐LAM in combination with sputum microscopy

The pooled sensitivity of a combination of LF‐LAM and sputum microscopy (either test positive) was 59% (47% to 70%), representing a 19% (4% to 36%) increase over sputum microscopy alone, while the pooled specificity was 92% (73% to 97%), representing a 6% (1% to 24%) decrease from sputum microscopy alone (Figure 7).

LF‐LAM versus sputum Xpert® MTB/RIF

Three studies including 909 participants (327 (36%) with TB), directly compared LF‐LAM and sputum Xpert® MTB/RIF in the same patients (Lawn 2014a; Nakiyingi 2014; Peter 2015). (We classified participants unable to produce sputum as negative by sputum testing). The pooled sensitivity of LF‐LAM was 36% (31% to 42%), lower than the pooled sensitivity of Xpert® MTB/RIF of 61% (39% to 77%). Pooled specificities were similar, 96% (94% to 98%) for LF‐LAM and 97% (94% to 99%) for Xpert® MTB/RIF (Figure 8).

LF‐LAM in combination with sputum Xpert® MTB/RIF

The pooled sensitivity of a combination of LF‐LAM and sputum Xpert® MTB/RIF (either test positive) was 75% (61% to 87%) representing a 13% (1% to 37%) increase over Xpert® MTB/RIF alone, while the pooled specificity was 93% (81% to 97%), representing a 4% (1% to 16%) decrease from Xpert® MTB/RIF alone (Figure 8).

Uninterpretable index test results

Studies reported few uninterpretable test results. Peter 2012a reported that 1% to 2% of 423 tests remained 'indeterminate' after repeat testing. Lawn 2014a reported no invalid or uninterpretable results. Nakiyingi 2014 reported that a valid LF‐LAM result was obtained on the first attempt for all tests (997/997, 100%). Peter 2015 reported that fewer than 1% of LF‐LAM strip tests failed on the first attempt and required usage of a second strip to produce valid results.

Investigations of heterogeneity

LF‐LAM (grade 2), stratified by CD4 count

We included five studies in the analyses by CD4 count (Andrews 2014; Lawn 2014a; Nakiyingi 2014; Peter 2012a; Peter 2015). See Figure 9 and Figure 10.

CD4 > 200 cells per µL

The five studies that evaluated participants with CD4 > 200 cells per µL included 925 HIV‐positive participants, 218 (24%) with TB. Sensitivity estimates ranged from 4% to 100% and specificity estimates ranged from 83% to 100%. The pooled sensitivity and specificity (95% CrI) were 15% (8% to 27%) and 96% (89% to 99%). When we limited the analysis to studies involving inpatients (excluding Peter 2015), the pooled sensitivity and specificity were 14% (6% to 33%) and 97% (88% to 99%).

CD4 ≤ 200 cells per µL

The five studies that evaluated participants with CD4 ≤ 200 cells per µL included 1344 HIV‐positive participants, 605 (45%) with TB. Sensitivity estimates ranged from 24% to 82% and specificity estimates ranged from 72% to 98%. The pooled sensitivity and specificity (95% CrI) were 50% (95% CrI 35% to 67%) and 90% (95% CrI 78% to 95%). When we limited the analysis to studies involving inpatients (excluding Peter 2015), the pooled sensitivity and specificity were 56% (95% CrI 42% to 71%) and 88% (95% CrI 70% to 95%). The probability that LAM sensitivity and specificity are higher among participants with CD4 ≤ 200 compared to those with CD4 > 200 were 100% and 6%, respectively.

CD4 ≤ 100 cells per µL

The five studies that evaluated participants with CD4 ≤ 100 cells per µL included 859 HIV‐positive participants, 402 (47%) with TB. Sensitivity estimates ranged from 30% to 79% and specificity estimates ranged from 79% to 98%. The pooled sensitivity and specificity (95% CrI) were 56% (41% to 70%) and 90% (81% to 95%). When we limited the analysis to studies involving inpatients (excluding Peter 2015), the pooled sensitivity and specificity were 62% (48% to 75%) and 89% (75% to 95%). The probability that LAM sensitivity and specificity are higher among participants with CD4 ≤ 100 compared to those with CD4 > 100 were 99% and 33%, respectively.

CD4 ≤ 50 cells per µL

The five studies that evaluated participants with CD4 ≤ 50 cells per µL included 543 HIV‐positive participants, 262 (48%) with TB. Sensitivity estimates ranged from 52% to 73% and specificity estimates ranged from 67% to 98%. The pooled sensitivity and specificity (95% CrI) were 62% (49% to 73%) and 89% (77% to 95%). When we limited the analysis to studies involving inpatients (excluding Peter 2015), the pooled sensitivity and specificity were 63% (49% to 76%) and 86% (71% to 94%). The probability that LAM sensitivity and specificity are higher among participants with CD4 ≤ 50 compared to those with CD4 > 50 were 98% and 25%, respectively.

LF‐LAM (grade 2), stratified by clinical setting

Inpatients

In the analysis of LF‐LAM (grade 2) for TB diagnosis among inpatients, we included four studies involving 1299 HIV‐positive inpatients, 517 (40%) with TB (Andrews 2014; Lawn 2014a; Nakiyingi 2014; Peter 2012a). Sensitivity estimates ranged from 39% to 84% and specificity estimates ranged from 75% to 99% (Figure 11). The pooled sensitivity and specificity (95% CrI) were 53% (38% to 70%) and 90% (73% to 96%).

Outpatients

We identified two studies that evaluated LF‐LAM (grade 2) for TB diagnosis among outpatients (Nakiyingi 2014;Peter 2015). Sensitivity estimates ranged from 18% to 23% and specificity estimates ranged from 93% to 99% (Figure 11).

Sensitivity analyses

LF‐LAM (grade 2) for TB diagnosis

In the analysis of LF‐LAM (grade 2) for TB diagnosis with respect to a microbiological reference standard, when we limited the studies to those at low risk of bias for patient selection (excluding Peter 2015; four studies, 1744 HIV‐positive participants, 638 (36%) with TB) pooled sensitivity and specificity were 50% (35% to 69%) and 91% (75% to 97%). There were insufficient data to carry out a sensitivity analysis to assess the robustness of meta‐analyses based on the quality of the reference standard.

LF‐LAM for TB screening among participants irrespective of signs and symptoms for TB

Six studies evaluated the accuracy of LF‐LAM for screening in a target population irrespective of TB symptoms (Balcha 2014; Bjerrum 2015; Drain 2014a; Drain 2014b; LaCourse 2015; Lawn 2012a). Four (67%) studies provided data at grade 1 (1935 participants; 333 (17%) with TB) (Balcha 2014; Drain 2014a;Drain 2014b; Lawn 2012a), and three (43%) studies provided data at grade 2 (1055 participants; 112 (11%) with TB) (Bjerrum 2015; Drain 2014b; LaCourse 2015). The median CD4 in these studies ranged from 127 to 437 cells per µL. All studies were carried out exclusively or largely in an outpatient setting; a single study, Bjerrum 2015, included a minority of participants from an inpatient setting.

We had limited data for LF‐LAM for TB screening as described below.

LF‐LAM (grade 2), microbiological reference standard

Three studies evaluated LF‐LAM (grade 2) for TB screening (1055 HIV‐positive participants, 112 (11%) with TB), with respect to a microbiological reference standard (Bjerrum 2015; Drain 2014b; LaCourse 2015). Sensitivity estimates ranged from 0% to 44%, and specificity estimates from 94% to 95% (Figure 12). Sensitivity was lowest in LaCourse 2015. Differences between this study and others included low TB prevalence (1%), a study population consisting exclusively of pregnant women, and high median CD4 count.

LF‐LAM (grade 1), microbiological reference standard

In the analysis of LF‐LAM (grade 1) for TB screening with respect to a microbiological reference standard, we included four studies (different from those studies contributing data for LF‐LAM grade 2) involving 1935 HIV‐positive participants, 333 (17%) with TB (Balcha 2014; Drain 2014a; Drain 2014b; Lawn 2012a). Both sensitivity and specificity estimates were variable; sensitivity estimates ranged from 26% to 41%, and specificity estimates from 90% to 99% (Figure 12). The pooled sensitivity and specificity (95% CrI) were 30% (20% to 43%) and 94% (86% to 97%).

LF‐LAM (grade 2), composite reference standard

Two studies evaluated LF‐LAM for TB screening, with respect to a composite reference standard (Bjerrum 2015; LaCourse 2015). Sensitivity estimates ranged from 0% to 36%, and specificity estimates ranged from 95% to 98% (Figure 13).

LF‐LAM (grade 2) and existing tests

LF‐LAM versus sputum microscopy

Three studies directly compared LF‐LAM and sputum microscopy in the same participants (Bjerrum 2015; Drain 2014b; LaCourse 2015). The sensitivity of LF‐LAM compared to smear in these studies was 44% (30% to 58%) versus 53% (39% to 66%) for Bjerrum 2015; 28% (16% to 42%) versus 15% (7% to 27%) for Drain 2014b; and 0% versus 0%, for LaCourse 2015 (Figure 14).

LF‐LAM in combination with sputum microscopy

Three studies directly compared LF‐LAM and sputum microscopy in the same participants (Bjerrum 2015; Drain 2014b; LaCourse 2015). The sensitivity of LF‐LAM combined with smear in these studies (compared to smear alone) was 62% (48% to 75%) versus 53% (39% to 66%) for Bjerrum 2015; 35% (23% to 49%) versus 15% (7% to 27%) for Drain 2014b; and 0% versus 0%, for LaCourse 2015 (Figure 14).

LF‐LAM and sputum Xpert® MTB/RIF

We did not have sufficient data to evaluate LF‐LAM and sputum Xpert® MTB/RIF (one study, three participants with TB; LaCourse 2015).

Uninterpretable index test results

The included studies reported high levels of test interpretability. Bjerrum 2015 reported that all (100%) 469 LAM tests in their study yielded interpretable results; similarly, LaCourse 2015 reported no uninterpretable results.

Investigations of heterogeneity

LF‐LAM (grade 2), stratified by CD4 count

There were limited data to evaluate LF‐LAM (grade 2) by CD4 thresholds.

CD4 > 100 cells per µL

Three studies evaluated LF‐LAM in patients with CD4 > 100 cells per µL (Bjerrum 2015; Drain 2014b; LaCourse 2015). Sensitivity estimates ranged from 0% to 16% and specificity estimates ranged from 89% to 95% (Figure 15).

CD4 ≤ 100 cells per µL

Two studies evaluated LF‐LAM in patients with CD4 ≤ 100 cells per µL (Bjerrum 2015; Drain 2014b). Sensitivity estimates ranged from 37% to 48% and specificity estimates ranged from 80% to 100% (Figure 15).

Sensitivity analyses, LF‐LAM (grade 2) for TB screening

For TB screening, there were insufficient data to carry out sensitivity analyses to assess the robustness of the meta‐analyses based on methodological quality items.

Other analyses

Concerning inter‐reader variability, there was a high degree of agreement; the included studies reported on inter‐reader variability in the form of a Kappa statistic or percent concordance between multiple readers. Four studies of TB diagnosis reported Kappa statistics ranging from 0.78 to 0.97 (Lawn 2014a; Nakiyingi 2014; Peter 2012a; Peter 2015), and most reported values > 0.92. Two studies of TB screening reported Kappa values of 0.92 to 0.97 (Bjerrum 2015; Lawn 2012a), and one study reported 100% concordance between readers (Balcha 2014). There were limited data on intra‐reader agreement; Peter 2012a reported a Kappa statistic of 0.92 to 0.96, which indicated very good agreement.

Table 2 Comparison of mortality in LF‐LAM‐positive and LF‐LAM‐negative participants. We acknowledge that patient outcomes are clearly important to patients, decision makers, and the wider TB community. However, we could not systematically address outcomes in addition to diagnostic accuracy as they would have required a different methodology. Nonetheless, we looked for and summarized the data on patient outcomes from the included studies, including data from secondary analyses. Six included studies provided data on the association of LF‐LAM and mortality in publications and related reports or in unpublished data (Balcha 2014; Bjerrum 2015; Drain 2014c; Lawn 2012a; Nakiyingi 2014; Peter 2015; see Table 5). These studies were conducted in both inpatient and outpatient settings. Data on patient outcomes were largely restricted to post‐hoc analyses. Nonetheless, available data consistently suggested higher disease severity among LF‐LAM positive TB participants than LF‐LAM negative TB participants. All six studies showed a consistent finding of increasing mortality with LF‐LAM positivity, despite considerable variability in the length of follow‐up, method of TB diagnosis, and provision of treatment. We noted that the investigators in these studies did not use the results of LF‐LAM to decide TB treatment initiation.

Balcha 2014 reported higher mortality (20% versus 3%, P < 0.001) in LF‐LAM positive than LF‐LAM negative participants. Similarly Manabe 2014 reported higher mortality (28% versus 13%, P = 0.035) in LF‐LAM positive than LF‐LAM negative TB participants (secondary analysis, Nakiyingi 2014). Manabe 2014 additionally found higher mortality in LF‐LAM positive participants without microbiological evidence of TB (34% versus 19% for LF‐LAM positive and LF‐LAM negative participants, respectively). Lawn 2012c found that among 23 TB participants who were LF‐LAM positive, five people died (22%) compared to zero deaths (0/36) among TB participants who were LF‐LAM negative (secondary analysis, Lawn 2012a). In another secondary analysis (Lawn 2012a), Lawn 2013b reported that LF‐LAM sensitivity was 100% among TB participants who died compared to 25% among TB participants who were alive at 90 days (P = 0.002). Peter 2015 reported mortality of 25% and 11% in LF‐LAM positive and LF‐LAM negative participants, respectively. Finally, Bjerrum 2015 reported that among all participants, 49% of those who were LF‐LAM‐positive died versus 14% of those who were LF‐LAM negative (P < 0.001). Among TB participants, 54% of LF‐LAM‐positive participants died compared to only 16% of those who were LF‐LAM negative (P = 0.003).

Bjerrum 2015 and Drain 2015 (related report, Drain 2014c) included treatment data in their studies. Bjerrum 2015 reported that among TB participants who received TB treatment, 31% of those who were LF‐LAM positive died compared to only 4% of those who were LF‐LAM negative. Among TB participants who did not receive treatment at the time of assessment in the study, 100% of those who were LF‐LAM positive died compared to 33% of those who were LF‐LAM negative. In each of these studies, LF‐LAM results were unavailable to clinicians. In another post‐hoc analysis, Peter 2013 reported that among inpatients, LF‐LAM‐positive TB participants missed by empirical early treatment had lower CD4 counts and higher median illness severity scores, compared to participants who received early treatment based on clinical decision making. Drain 2015 reported LF‐LAM responses over time. They reported that among participants receiving TB therapy, having a positive LF‐LAM test at the two‐month visit was associated with an adjusted hazard ratio (HR) of 5.58 for mortality (median follow‐up time of 49 months) compared to participants with a negative LF‐LAM test at the two‐month visit. Participants with a positive LF‐LAM at six months had an adjusted HR of 42.1 for mortality during study follow‐up. They found no difference (adjusted HR 1.41, P = 0.49) in mortality comparing baseline LF‐LAM results.

Concerning the impact of LF‐LAM implementation on patient outcomes, Peter 2016 found that, in HIV‐positive inpatients, LF‐LAM in combination with routine diagnostic tests to guide the rapid initiation of TB treatment was associated with a relative risk reduction of 17% (95% CI 4% to 28%) in eight‐week mortality compared with routine diagnostic tests alone (no LF‐LAM). We are also aware of two additional studies with data on the impact of LF‐LAM on patient outcomes expected in 2016 (Grant ongoing;NCT01990274).

Discussion

This systematic review summarizes the current literature and includes 12 unique studies on the accuracy of lateral flow urine lipoarabinomannan assay (LF‐LAM) for tuberculosis (TB) in people with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Six studies used LF‐LAM for TB diagnosis in participants with signs and symptoms of TB. The studies of TB diagnosis were largely conducted in inpatient settings and had high TB prevalence. Six studies used LF‐LAM for systematic screening of participants for TB regardless of their symptoms. The studies of TB screening were conducted exclusively or predominantly in outpatient settings and, compared to studies of TB diagnosis, had lower TB prevalence and involved patients with higher CD4 counts. All studies were conducted in low‐ and middle‐income countries.

LF‐LAM for TB diagnosis

See 'Summary of findings' table 1 (Table 1).

For TB diagnosis, the pooled sensitivity of LF‐LAM (grade 2) was low (45%) with relatively high pooled specificity (92%). We explored an alternative threshold (grade 1) for test positivity and found that both sensitivity (59%) and specificity (78%) were low. We found higher sensitivity (59%) when LF‐LAM was combined with microscopy (either test positive) which represented an increase of 19% over sputum microscopy alone, although pooled specificity decreased 6% from microscopy alone (four studies). In planned investigations, we observed an inverse correlation between LF‐LAM sensitivity and CD4 count, with increasing sensitivity as patient CD4 count decreased (increased from 15% in patients with CD4 cell count > 200 cells per µL to 62% in patients with CD4 ≤ 50 cells per µL) This inverse correlation may reflect increased LF‐LAM sensitivity among those with advanced disease, disseminated disease, or higher bacillary burden. Pooled specificity was similar across CD4 strata. These findings suggest that LF‐LAM may aid in the diagnosis of TB in seriously ill patients with low CD4 counts. While the test does not identify all TB cases, it may be of particular value in diagnosing seriously ill patients who are unable to produce sputum or cannot be diagnosed with other TB diagnostic tests. We a priori planned to investigate and expected to find higher accuracy in patients with lower CD4 counts and patients who were hospitalized. In subgroup analyses, we found LF‐LAM (grade 2) sensitivity was generally higher among inpatients (53%) than among outpatients (18% to 23%). Although subgroup comparisons in diagnostic accuracy reviews are observational and suffer from the same limitations as all observational findings (for example, confounding between characteristics), there is a scientific rationale for this finding in that inpatients are likely to have higher disease severity or higher bacillary burden.

LF‐LAM for screening for TB

See 'Summary of findings' table 2 (Table 2).

Few studies evaluated LF‐LAM for TB screening among individuals irrespective of symptoms at the currently recommended grade 2 threshold for positivity. Sensitivity ranged from 0% to 44%, while specificity ranged from 94% to 95%. We explored an alternative threshold (grade 1) for positivity and found low pooled sensitivity (30%) and reasonably high pooled specificity (94%).

Summary of main results

We have summarized the main results in the 'Summary of findings' tables (Table 1; Table 2).

For TB diagnosis in HIV‐positive people with signs and symptoms suggestive of TB, the pooled sensitivity and specificity (95% credible interval (CrI)) of LF‐LAM (grade 2) were 45% (29% to 63%) and 92% (80% to 97%).. For TB screening in HIV‐positive people regardless of signs and symptoms of TB, LF‐LAM (grade 2) sensitivity estimates ranged from 0% to 44% and specificity estimates from 94% to 95%.. Few studies used a higher quality reference standard with more than one type of clinical specimen. 

We note that the band intensity corresponding to grade 2 in this review corresponds to the current manufacturer threshold for positivity (that is, grade 1 on the new manufacturer reference card).

Application of the meta‐analysis to a hypothetical cohort

LF‐LAM for TB diagnosis

See 'Summary of findings' table 1 (Table 1).

If the pooled sensitivity and specificity estimates for LF‐LAM (grade 2) are applied to a hypothetical cohort of 1000 HIV‐positive individuals where 300 (30%) of those with symptoms actually have TB, LF‐LAM would correctly identify 135 people as having TB while missing 165 people with TB. In this same population of 1000 people, where 700 do not have TB, the test will correctly classify 644 people as not having TB while misclassifying 56 as having TB.

LF‐LAM for TB screening

See 'Summary of findings' table 2 (Table 2).

If the ranges in sensitivity and specificity for LF‐LAM (grade 2) are applied to a hypothetical cohort of 1000 HIV‐positive individuals where 10 (1%) of those being screened for TB actually have TB, LF‐LAM would correctly identify zero to four people as having TB while missing six to 10 people with TB. In this same population of 1000 people, where 990 do not have TB, the test will correctly classify 931 to 941 people as not having TB while misclassifying 49 to 59 as having TB.

Strengths and weaknesses of the review

The findings in this review are based on comprehensive searching, strict inclusion criteria, and standardized data extraction. The strength of our review is that it enabled an assessment of the accuracy of LF‐LAM in HIV‐positive people for two purposes, diagnosis and screening. We determined test accuracy at two different positivity cut‐offs and for LF‐LAM combined with existing sputum‐based tests. We also investigated heterogeneity with respect to the CD4 count. The main limitations of the review were the use of a lower quality reference standard in most included studies, and the small number of studies and participants included in the analyses. The results should, therefore, be interpreted with caution.

Completeness of evidence

This data set involved comprehensive searching and correspondence with experts in the field and the test manufacturer to identify additional studies, as well as repeated correspondence with study authors to obtain additional and unpublished data. The search strategy included studies published in all languages. However, as diagnostic accuracy studies are poorly indexed, we acknowledge that we may have missed some studies despite the comprehensive search.

Accuracy of the reference standards used

In a diagnostic test accuracy systematic review, the reference standard is the best available test to determine the presence or absence of the target condition. A microbiological reference standard, primarily culture, is considered the best reference standard for TB. HIV‐positive TB patients may have pulmonary TB, extrapulmonary TB, or both pulmonary and extrapulmonary TB. Due to the difficulties in diagnosing HIV‐associated TB, it is recommended that multiple cultures from sputum and other specimen types be evaluated. We therefore considered a reference standard using two or more specimen types to be of higher quality than a reference standard using one specimen type. The higher quality reference standard is better at classifying which patients have and do not have TB. A lower quality reference standard may miss some TB cases and classify some TB patients as not having TB. This may make a truly positive LF‐LAM result seem like an FP leading to an underestimation of specificity. However, in the review, only two studies (33%) for TB diagnosis and one study (17%) for TB screening used a higher quality reference standard.

Compared with a microbiological reference standard, a composite reference standard using clinical information may also be less likely to misclassify TB patients as not having TB, especially in patients with paucibacillary pulmonary disease in whom sputum culture may be negative. We found LF‐LAM specificity ranged from 96% to 99% for TB diagnosis with respect to a composite reference standard. However, we had limited data and these findings should be interpreted with caution.

Quality and quality of reporting of the included studies

There were few studies that included extrapulmonary specimens in addition to sputum, and few studies that included participants unable to expectorate sputum. We had limited data to address these quality items in sensitivity analyses and acknowledge that these features may have contributed to risk of bias in the accuracy estimates. For TB diagnosis, in the patient selection domain, we considered two studies (33%) to be at high risk of bias, and in the reference standard domain, we considered four studies (66%) to be at high risk of bias. For TB screening, in the patient selection domain, we considered two studies (33%) to be at high risk of bias and in the reference standard domain, we considered five studies (83%) to be at high risk of bias. Using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) approach, we judged the evidence for diagnostic accuracy of LF‐LAM to be of low or very low quality. This means that our confidence in the effect estimate is limited and the true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect. In general, studies were fairly well reported, though we corresponded with almost all study authors for additional data and missing information.

Applicability of findings to the review question

We had low concern about the applicability of the included studies to our review question as assessed by the Quality Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies‐2 (QUADAS‐2) tool. We considered the degree to which setting, patient spectrum, index test, and reference standard characteristics could affect test accuracy estimates. Although all studies were performed in low‐ or middle‐income countries, we think, given the underlying pathophysiology of HIV‐associated TB, LF‐LAM would perform similarly in high‐income countries. This review evaluated LF‐LAM at the current manufacturer‐recommended cut‐off for positivity, as well as an alternative threshold. Therefore the findings in this review should be considered applicable to the test. However, it is important to note that this review assessed sensitivity and specificity in applied research settings. Although the participant characteristics and settings matched our review question in most cases, as studies were carried out under research conditions, it is possible that the accuracy of LF‐LAM may be lower in routine practice settings.

Authors' conclusions

Among HIV‐positive people who present with symptoms suggestive of TB, this Cochrane review found low LF‐LAM sensitivity, which suggests that LF‐LAM cannot be relied on alone for the diagnosis of TB. For TB diagnosis, the combination of LF‐LAM with sputum microscopy suggests increased sensitivity for TB compared to either test alone, but with a decrease in specificity. The findings also suggest increased sensitivity at lower CD4 counts compared to higher CD4 counts. However, we had limited data and these findings should be interpreted with caution. Nonetheless, in HIV‐positive people with low CD4 counts who are seriously ill, LF‐LAM may help with the diagnosis of TB. As a simple point‐of‐care test that does not depend upon sputum evaluation, there may also be situations where LF‐LAM testing offers advantages compared to existing sputum‐based tests.. Clinicians must consider the need for additional testing when interpreting negative LF‐LAM results. The consequences of false negative results are increased risk of morbidity and mortality, delayed treatment initiation, and the continued risk of TB transmission. The consequences of false positive results are likelihood of anxiety and morbidity caused by additional testing, unnecessary treatment, and possible adverse events; possible stigma associated with a diagnosis of TB; and the chance that a false positive may halt further diagnostic evaluation. As LF‐LAM does not offer information about drug‐resistance, some patients with unidentified drug‐resistant TB may be inappropriately treated with a regimen appropriate only for drug‐sensitive disease.. For TB screening among HIV‐positive people regardless of TB symptoms, LF‐LAM yielded low sensitivity and relatively high specificity. These findings do not support the use of LF‐LAM as screening test for TB.. A systematic review of economic evaluations of LF‐LAM for TB, Dowdy 2015 [pers comm], identified two studies that evaluated the addition of LF‐LAM to existing diagnostic strategies including smear, Xpert® MTB/RIF, and clinical diagnosis (Shah 2013; Sun 2013). Both studies evaluated LF‐LAM in the African setting; one study was restricted to inpatients with CD4 < 100 cells per µL (Sun 2013). The two studies, using similar methodologies, found that incorporation of LF‐LAM into TB diagnostic algorithms for HIV‐positive people is highly cost‐effective. This result was robust to wide sensitivity analyses that explored uncertainties in input parameter estimates. Given the low cost of LF‐LAM, the findings suggest that the cost‐effectiveness of LF‐LAM ultimately converges to the cost‐effectiveness of HIV and TB treatment because the incremental diagnostic costs for LF‐LAM are dwarfed by treatment costs for those who test positive. Key parameters that influenced the degree of LF‐LAM cost‐effectiveness included the specificity of LF‐LAM, prevalence of TB in the target population, the life expectancy of HIV‐infected TB survivors, and costs of treating TB and HIV. Future studies that evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of non‐sputum‐based tests for TB, such as LF‐LAM, in HIV‐positive people should use a reference standard that includes at least two specimen types or extrapulmonary specimens in addition to sputum. Moreover, future studies should include patients unable to expectorate sputum in the analysis. These features of study design may decrease the risk of bias in the accuracy estimates. Further research on effective implementation of LF‐LAM within routine clinical practice is needed because the test can only influence clinical practice if the results are believed and acted upon. 

Figure 1

(A) Alere DetermineTM TB LAM Ag tests. To the sample pad (white pad marked by the arrow symbols) 60 µL of urine is applied and visualized bands are read 25 minutes later. (B) Reference card accompanying test strips to 'grade' the test result and determine positivity (33). Copyright © [2014] [Alere Inc]: reproduced with permission.

Figure 2

Study flow diagram.

Figure 3

LF‐LAM for TB diagnosis. 'Risk of bias' and applicability concerns summary: review authors' judgements about each domain for each included study.

Figure 4

LF‐LAM for TB screening. 'Risk of bias' and applicability concerns summary: review authors' judgements about each domain for each included study.

Figure 5

Forest plots of LF‐LAM (Grade 1 and 2) sensitivity and specificity for TB against a microbiological reference standard (TB diagnosis). TP = True Positive; FP = False Positive; FN = False Negative; TN = True Negative. Between brackets are the 95% confidence interval (CI) of sensitivity and specificity. The figure shows the estimated sensitivity and specificity of the study (blue square) and its 95% CI (black horizontal line).

Figure 6

Forest plots of LF‐LAM (grade 2) sensitivity and specificity for TB against a composite reference standard (TB diagnosis). TP = True Positive; FP = False Positive; FN = False Negative; TN = True Negative. Between brackets are the 95% confidence interval (CI) of sensitivity and specificity. The figure shows the estimated sensitivity and specificity of the study (blue square) and its 95% CI (black horizontal line).

Figure 7

Accuracy of smear microscopy (black circle) and smear microscopy in combination with LF‐LAM (Grade 2) (blue circle) plotted in receiver operating characteristic (ROC) space. The dashed lines are only for illustration to show how sensitivity and specificity changed with the addition of the LF‐LAM test.

Figure 8

Accuracy of Xpert® MTB/RIF (black circle) and Xpert® MTB/RIF in combination with LF‐LAM (grade 2) (blue circle) plotted in receiver operating characteristic (ROC) space. The dashed lines are only for illustration to show how sensitivity and specificity changed with the addition of the LF‐LAM test.

Figure 9

Forest plots of LF‐LAM (grade 2) sensitivity and specificity for TB against a microbiological reference standard, by CD4 strata (TB Diagnosis). TP = True Positive; FP = False Positive; FN = False Negative; TN = True Negative. Between brackets are the 95% confidence interval (CI) of sensitivity and specificity. The figure shows the estimated sensitivity and specificity of the study (blue square) and its 95% CI (black horizontal line).

Figure 10

Plots of (A) sensitivity and (B) specificity of LF‐LAM (grade 2) for TB diagnosis stratified by CD4 count. Plots were derived using a sample from the posterior distribution of the pooled sensitivity (A) and specificity (B). Circle represents the pooled estimates (median), with bars representing 95% credible intervals.

Figure 11

Forest plots of LF‐LAM (grade 2) sensitivity and specificity for TB against a microbiological reference standard, by health care setting (TB Diagnosis). TP = True Positive; FP = False Positive; FN = False Negative; TN = True Negative. Between brackets are the 95% confidence interval (CI) of sensitivity and specificity. The figure shows the estimated sensitivity and specificity of the study (blue square) and its 95% CI (black horizontal line).

Figure 12

Forest plots of LF‐LAM (grade 1 and 2) sensitivity and specificity for TB against a microbiological reference standard (TB Screening). TP = True Positive; FP = False Positive; FN = False Negative; TN = True Negative. Between brackets are the 95% confidence interval (CI) of sensitivity and specificity. The figure shows the estimated sensitivity and specificity of the study (blue square) and its 95% CI (black horizontal line).

Figure 13

Forest plots of LF‐LAM (grade 2) sensitivity and specificity for TB against a composite reference standard (TB Screening). TP = True Positive; FP = False Positive; FN = False Negative; TN = True Negative. Between brackets are the 95% confidence interval (CI) of sensitivity and specificity. The figure shows the estimated sensitivity and specificity of the study (blue square) and its 95% CI (black horizontal line).

Figure 14

Accuracy of smear microscopy (black circle) and smear microscopy in combination with LF‐LAM (grade 2) (blue circle) plotted in receiver operating characteristic (ROC) space. The dashed lines are only for illustration to show how sensitivity and specificity changed with the addition of the LF‐LAM test.

Figure 15

Forest plots of LF‐LAM (grade 2) sensitivity and specificity for TB (TB Screening). TP = True Positive; FP = stratified by CD4 count. False Positive; FN = False Negative; TN = True Negative. Between brackets are the 95% confidence interval (CI) of sensitivity and specificity. The figure shows the estimated sensitivity and specificity of the study (blue square) and its 95% CI (black horizontal line).

Test 1

Diagnosis of TB against microbiological reference at Grade 1: all participants.

Test 2

Diagnosis of TB against microbiological reference at Grade 2: all participants.

Test 3

Diagnosis of TB against composite reference at Grade 1: all participants.

Test 4

Diagnosis of TB against composite reference at Grade 2: all participants.

Test 5

Diagnosis of TB against microbiological reference at Grade 1, CD4 > 200.

Test 6

Diagnosis of TB against microbiological reference at Grade 1, CD4 < 200.

Test 7

Diagnosis of TB against microbiological reference at Grade 1, CD4 > 100.

Test 8

Diagnosis of TB against microbiological reference at Grade 1, CD4 < 100.

Test 9

Diagnosis of TB against microbiological reference at Grade 1, CD4 > 50.

Test 10

Diagnosis of TB against microbiological reference at Grade 1, CD4 < 50.

Test 11

Diagnosis of TB against microbiological reference at Grade 2, CD4 > 200.

Test 12

Diagnosis of TB against microbiological reference at Grade 2, CD4 < 200.

Test 13

Diagnosis of TB against microbiological reference at Grade 1, CD4 > 100.

Test 14

Diagnosis of TB against microbiological reference at Grade 1, CD4 < 100.

Test 15

Diagnosis of TB against microbiological reference at Grade 1, CD4 > 50.

Test 16

Diagnosis of TB against microbiological reference at Grade 1, CD4 < 50.

Test 17

Diagnosis of TB against microbiological reference at Grade 1: inpatients.

Test 18

Diagnosis of TB against microbiological reference at Grade 2: inpatients.

Test 19

Diagnosis of TB against microbiological reference at Grade 1: outpatients.

Test 20

Diagnosis of TB against microbiological reference at Grade 2: outpatients.

Test 21

Diagnosis of TB with LAM at Grade 2 (among studies comparing with smear).

Test 22

Diagnosis of TB with smear (among studies comparing with LAM).

Test 23

Diagnosis of TB with combination of LAM at Grade 2 with smear.

Test 24

Diagnosis of TB with LAM at Grade 2 (among studies comparing with Xpert®).

Test 25

Diagnosis of TB with Xpert® (among studies comparing with LAM).

Test 26

Diagnosis of TB with combination of LAM at Grade 2 with Xpert®.

Test 27

Screening for TB against microbiological reference at Grade 1: all participants.

Test 28

Screening for TB against microbiological reference at Grade 2: all participants.

Test 29

Screening for TB against composite reference at Grade 1: all participants.

Test 30

Screening for TB against composite reference at Grade 2: all participants.

Test 31

Screening for TB against microbiological reference at Grade 1, CD4 > 200.

Test 32

Screening for TB against microbiological reference at Grade 1, CD4 < 200.

Test 33

Screening for TB against microbiological reference at Grade 1, CD4 > 100.

Test 34

Screening for TB against microbiological reference at Grade 1, CD4 < 100.

Test 35

Screening for TB against microbiological reference at Grade 1, CD4 > 50.

Test 36

Screening for TB against microbiological reference at Grade 1, CD4 < 50.

Test 37

Screening for TB against microbiological reference at Grade 2, CD4 > 100.

Test 38

Screening for TB against microbiological reference at Grade 2, CD4 < 100.

Test 39

Screening for TB against microbiological reference at Grade 1: outpatients.

Test 40

Screening for TB with LAM at Grade 2 (among studies comparing with smear microscopy).

Test 41

Screening for TB with smear microscopy (among studies comparing with LAM).

Test 42

Screening for TB with the combination of LAM (Grade 2) and smear microscopy.

