The Kraepelinian dichotomy – going, going... but still not  gone

Abstract

Recent genetic studies reinforce the view that current approaches to the  diagnosis and classification of major psychiatric illness are inadequate.  These findings challenge the distinction between schizophrenia and bipolar  disorder, and suggest that more attention should be given to the relationship  between the functional psychoses and neurodevelopmental disorders such as  autism. We are entering a transitional period of several years during which  psychiatry will need to move from using traditional descriptive diagnoses to  clinical entities (categories and/or dimensions) that relate more closely to  the underlying workings of the brain.

The Kraepelinian dichotomy – the broad division of major mood and  psychotic illness of adulthood into schizophrenia and  ‘manic–depressive’ (bipolar) illness – has been  enshrined in Western psychiatry for over a century and continues to influence  clinical practice, research and public perceptions of mental illness. Nearly 5  years ago, we published an  editorial1 in which  we summarised emerging evidence undermining the dichotomy, and argued that  continued adherence to this approach is hampering research and clinical care.  Since then, a substantial and increasingly convergent body of evidence has  accrued from genetic studies that supports and refines this view. Here, we  summarise these findings and their implications for clinical psychiatry and  illness classification.

Findings inconsistent with the Kraepelinian dichotomy

Several studies have been published in the past 5 years that provide  compelling evidence that genetic susceptibility and, by implication, elements  of the underlying pathogenetic mechanisms are shared between bipolar disorder  and schizophrenia. Although most of this new evidence has come from  large-scale molecular genetic analyses, the molecular findings are fully  supported by a large family study of the two disorders. The recent evidence  also points to the need to reconsider the relationship of mood and psychotic  illness with other neuropsychiatric phenotypes such as autism. Key findings  include the largest family study of the two disorders ever conducted that  shows overlap in genetic susceptibility across bipolar disorder and  schizophrenia. This study included over 2 million nuclear families identified  from Swedish population and hospital discharge registers, and showed that  there are increased risks of both schizophrenia and bipolar disorder in  first-degree relatives of probands with either disorder. Moreover, there is  evidence from half-siblings and adopted-away relatives that this is due  substantially to genetic  factors.2,3

Additionally, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have demonstrated the  existence of common DNA variants (single nucleotide polymorphisms) that  influence risk of both schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. There is direct  molecular genetic support for a substantial genetic overlap between  schizophrenia and bipolar disorder from the recent large-scale GWAS of bipolar  disorder and schizophrenia in which thousands of individuals have been studied  for hundreds of thousands of common DNA variants spread across the genome.  This evidence includes analyses of specific risk loci, including  ZNF804A, initially identified as a risk gene for  schizophrenia,4 and  CACNA1C,5  which was strongly implicated initially in GWAS of bipolar  disorder.6 It is of  interest that there is evidence that variation at CACNA1C also  influences risk of recurrent unipolar  depression.5 More  broadly, there is evidence for overlap in the identity of genes showing  gene-wide association signals in GWAS of schizophrenia and bipolar  disorder.7 Perhaps  most compellingly, there is strong evidence that the aggregate polygenic  contribution of many alleles of small effect to susceptibility for  schizophrenia also influences susceptibility to bipolar  disorder.8

Although a great deal of work remains to be undertaken in delineating the  pathogenically relevant DNA variants and the biological mechanisms by which  they influence disease risk, the studies described above indicate that  schizophrenia and bipolar disorder (and recurrent depression) do not  ‘breed true’, but have an overlap in genetic risk and are  therefore likely to share some aspects of pathogenesis. This does not equate  to a simple dichotomous notion of completely distinct and unrelated disease  categories and allows us to reject the traditional, simplistic view of the  dichotomy. We think this is unlikely to surprise clinicians, who frequently  have to decide how to categorise and treat individuals with a mixture of  prominent mood and psychotic symptoms.

Findings indicating the need to reconsider the interface between  psychosis and autism

It has recently been recognised that structural genomic variants of small  or modest size (copy number variants (CNVs) of stretches of DNA of 1000 base  pairs or more) are a common cause of genetic variation in  humans,9 and such  variants have been reported in neuropsychiatric phenotypes, including autism,  ‘mental retardation’ (intellectual disability) and  schizophrenia.10–15  The overall ‘load’ of CNVs has been shown to be greater in  individuals with schizophrenia compared with controls, and there is convincing  evidence that a number of specific rare CNVs (<1% population minor allele  frequency) confer risk of schizophrenia, particularly those at 22q11 (the  velocardiofacial syndrome deletion), 1q21.1, 15q13.3 and  15q11.2,12–14  as well as deletions of the gene encoding the synaptic neural adhesion  molecule, neurexin  1.16 The specific  CNVs associated with risk of schizophrenia also confer risk of multiple  neuropsychiatric phenotypes, including autism and mental  retardation.17 This  indicates an overlap of genetic susceptibility and pathogenesis across the  categories of schizophrenia, autism and other neurodevelopmental disorders and  challenges the view that these are completely unrelated diagnostic  entities.

Findings suggesting that bipolar disorder and schizophrenia do not  have a single underlying cause and are not the same clinical entity

Although we can reject a simple model of separate, unrelated disease  categories, the data do not support a model of a single-disease category that  is undifferentiated with respect to the relationship between clinical  expression and genetic susceptibility, and, hence, underlying biological  mechanisms. For example, the same large family  study2 that  demonstrated a substantial overlap in genetic susceptibility to bipolar  disorder and schizophrenia also provided clear evidence for the existence of  non-shared genetic risk factors. These findings are fully consistent with  earlier genetic data suggesting that there are relatively specific as well as  shared susceptibility  genes.1 Recent  studies suggest that some of this specificity might be due to structural  genomic variation (CNVs). Although there is emerging evidence that CNVs have  some influence on the risk of bipolar  disorder,18,19  they appear to contribute less to the susceptibility to bipolar disorder than  to schizophrenia (to date, variants influencing bipolar disorder seem to be  smaller, less likely to be deletions, and have smaller effect  sizes).19,20  Under the assumption that bigger structural genomic variants, particularly  involving DNA loss, are more likely to affect brain development, we note that  these findings are consistent with the view that schizophrenia has a stronger  neurodevelopmental component than bipolar  disorder21 and  suggest that it lies on a gradient of decreasing neurodevelopmental impairment  between syndromes such as mental retardation and autism on one hand, and  bipolar disorder on the other (Fig.  1).

Data suggesting a degree of specificity between pathophysiology and  phenotype come from work at the interface of the traditional dichotomous  categories. Cases with a rich mix of clinical features of bipolar mood  episodes and the psychotic symptoms typical of schizophrenia (a broadly  defined schizoaffective illness) may be particularly useful for genetic  studies,22 and  there is evidence that variation within genes encoding gamma-aminobutyric acid  (A) receptor subunit genes may predispose relatively specifically to such  mixed mood–psychosis clinical  pictures.23  Although continued reliance on the relatively narrow DSM–IV and  ICD–10 definitions of schizoaffective disorder would appear to be  untenable, particularly on the grounds of poor  reliability,24,25  this clinical entity merits explicit recognition in order to explore this  possibility further. We note that the abolition of a schizoaffective category  from revisions to current classifications, as advocated by some (e.g.  Heckers25), would  risk further reinforcing a completely inappropriate dichotomous view.

Moving towards more biologically plausible and clinically useful
 models of psychosis

The main clinical aims of diagnosis include the optimisation of treatments  and allowing useful prognostic statements to be made. The history of medicine  suggests that therapeutic and prognostic decision-making are usually  facilitated, often greatly, as classifications move closer to the underlying  biological mechanisms. For this reason, it is desirable to move towards a  classification that maps the expression of illness onto the underlying  biological systems. It is not yet clear whether this will be most usefully  achieved by using multiple overlapping ‘categorical’ domains of  psychopathology or multiple  dimensions.1,26,27  Clinicians benefit from the simplest, most user-friendly model that is  clinically useful. Of course, the traditional dichotomy is simple and this  perhaps explains its persistence despite increasingly questioned clinical  usefulness.1 In our  2005 editorial we suggested that recent evidence made it necessary to consider  a mood–psychosis clinical dimension with at least three possible  overlapping broad domains of psychopathology (‘prototype  schizophrenia’, ‘schizoaffective’ and ‘prototype  bipolar’). More recent genetic data are broadly consistent with such a  model. However, these newer data also point to the need to consider a broader  clinical spectrum that includes also autism and mental retardation/cognitive  impairment at one end and non-psychotic mood disorder at the other.

A simple model of a complex set of relationships

If models of illness are to map onto the underlying functional systems of  the brain, it is obviously essential to take close account of normal as well  as abnormal brain function. The brain is a highly complex structure in which  high levels of anatomical and functional connectivity occur at many  levels.28,29  Plasticity occurs at all stages of development and environmental influences  cause important short- and long-term effects on brain function. Psychiatry  must strive to integrate evidence from various levels of neuroscientific  investigation – including molecular biology, cognitive neuroscience and  affective neuroscience – to move towards a coherent understanding of  psychiatric illness that can appropriately use models from each area of  inquiry for the benefit of patients.

Here, we present a simple uniaxial model for the relationship between  several traditional diagnostic entities that is broadly consistent with  current genetic data (Fig. 1).  The aim is to aid thinking, guide future work and stimulate debate. Key  features of the model include:

using dimensions/continua to conceptualise the major clinical
 syndromes;. broad organisation along a major axis according to a gradient of increasing
 proportion of neurodevelopmental contribution to illness in one direction and
 increasing proportion of episodic affective contribution in the opposite
 direction;. recognising that multiple domains/dimensions of psychopathology contribute
 to the major clinical syndromes in varying proportions and that these may
 relate more closely to dysfunctional brain systems;. recognising that the states of relevant brain systems depend crucially on
 environmental influences (both developmentally and dynamically);. recognising the complexity, interdependence and modular nature of brain
 systems (where modules are functionally discernible, not necessarily
 temporally or spatially stable subunits, which are interconnected in complex,
 often multilayered networks of neuronal
 circuits);29. recognising that we are not dealing with a one-to-one relationship (i.e.
 the concept of ‘a gene for schizophrenia’ or even ‘a gene
 for auditory hallucinations’ is not
 plausible),30 but
 rather sets of many one-to-one and/or one-to-many relationships.  

Future challenges

We have entered a period of unprecedentedly rapid progress in understanding  mental illness. While ensuring that the needs of our patients are at the  forefront of thinking and planning, we need to prepare ourselves to move  towards more complex and biologically plausible models of illness rather than  clinging on to the biology-free models based on clinical empiricism that have  been the tradition of psychiatry.

Although current data suggest that there is some degree of genetic  specificity at the level of clinical symptoms, it is an empirical question as  to what degree of specificity it will be possible to delineate and which  specific domains (or dimensions or syndromes) of psychopathology will be most  useful to recognise and  measure.31 There is  a pressing need to characterise the neurocognitive disturbances that underlie  the major domains of psychopathology if we wish to develop a more refined  taxonomy of mental  disorders29 as well  as better entities for genetic and other aetiological studies. It is to be  hoped that more fundamental phenotypes might emerge from studies of the  biological systems implicated by genetic and other biological findings.

A combination of these top-down and bottom-up approaches might ultimately  allow us to trace the links between genotype and phenotype. These efforts will  require greater integration between different research modalities, including  genetics, psychopathology, and cognitive and affective neuroscience, together  with insights from systems biology. This should be complemented by  consideration of social and other relevant environmental variables, and  include a developmental perspective. There is also a need for more  longitudinal studies; it seems inconceivable that future taxonomies will not  address the considerable variations in course and outcome seen in the clinic.  This will require major investment in research, closer cooperation between  different research paradigms and a movement away from schools of thought that  are often held with ideological zeal.

Conclusion

At a time of transition it will be necessary to be open-minded and  flexible. Care must be taken to ensure that the diagnostic entities (be they  dimensions, categories or a mixture) are based on solid data, are usable and  have proven clinical utility. Inevitably, research must move faster and be  willing to explore a wide range of options unconstrained by current diagnostic  categories. Clinical practice must expect a slower pace of change and a longer  transitional period. Efforts to reformulate DSM–V and ICD–11 are  currently underway. In our view, the most pragmatic solution to current needs  is to encourage the careful measurement and reappraisal of psychopathology by  using dimensional measures of key domains of psychopathology which can sit  alongside the use of categories. The resulting detailed clinical diagnostic  evaluation will allow the efficacy of current and future treatments to be  monitored in individual cases and better serve research into aetiology,  classification and treatment. Thus, it is likely to be a while yet before the  traditional dichotomous prototypes will make an exit from official  classifications, even though evidence and thinking are moving on.

At the time Emil Kraepelin introduced his dichotomy based on longitudinal  course there were no effective treatments. At the end of the 19th century, it  was logical to use a simple diagnostic approach that offered reasonable  prognostic validity. At the beginning of the 21st century, we must set our  sights higher.

Funding

The authors’ work on the genetics of psychosis and mood disorders is  funded through grants from the  ,  ,    and   .

Fig. 1

Hypothesised model of the complex relationship between biological variation  and some major forms of psychopathology.

This is a simplified model of a highly complex set of relationships between  genotype and clinical phenotype. Starting at the level of genetic variation  (lowest tier in figure), we have represented DNA structural variation (in  purple) as contributing particularly to neurodevelopmental disorders and  associated particularly with enduring cognitive and functional impairment.  Single gene variants, of which there are many, are shown as asterisks. In  general, even single base-pair changes in a gene may influence multiple  biological systems because genes typically have multiple functions and produce  proteins that interact with multiple other proteins. For simplicity, we have  shown only an example of a variant that influences three biological systems  (blue asterisk and arrows) and another that influences only one system (black  asterisk and arrow). Variation in the relevant biological systems is  influenced by genotype at many genetic loci and by environmental  exposures/experiences both historically during development and currently to  influence the dynamic state of the systems. The relevant biological systems  influence the neural modules that comprise the key relevant functional  elements of the brain (shown as solid turquoise circles). Typically, multiple  biological systems influence each neural module. The (abnormal) functioning of  the neural modules together influences the domains of psychopathology  experienced and ultimately the clinical syndromes. We have ordered some  important clinical syndromes along a single major axis with a gradient of  decreasing proportional neurodevelopmental contribution to causation and  reciprocal increasing gradient of proportion of episodic affective disturbance  (we use the term ‘mental retardation’ in the diagram because it is  understood internationally, but recognise that the terms intellectual  disability and learning disability are commonly used in the UK). The single  axis is a simplifying device – there is substantial individual variation  and it is recognised that, for example, it is not uncommon for individuals  diagnosed with autism to experience substantial mood pathology. Key features  of the model are described within the text.

