Identification of Nitric Oxide as an Endogenous Inhibitor of 26S Proteasomes in Vascular Endothelial Cells

Abstract

The 26S proteasome plays a fundamental role in almost all eukaryotic cells, including vascular endothelial cells. However, it remains largely unknown how proteasome functionality is regulated in the vasculature. Endothelial nitric oxide (NO) synthase (eNOS)-derived NO is known to be essential to maintain endothelial homeostasis. The aim of the present study was to establish the connection between endothelial NO and 26S proteasome functionality in vascular endothelial cells. The 26S proteasome reporter protein levels, 26S proteasome activity, and the O-GlcNAcylation of Rpt2, a key subunit of the proteasome regulatory complex, were assayed in 26S proteasome reporter cells, human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC), and mouse aortic tissues isolated from 26S proteasome reporter and eNOS knockout mice. Like the other selective NO donors, NO derived from activated eNOS (by pharmacological and genetic approach) increased O-GlcNAc modification of Rpt2, reduced proteasome chymotrypsin-like activity, and caused 26S proteasome reporter protein accumulation. Conversely, inactivation of eNOS reversed all the effects. SiRNA knockdown of O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT), the key enzyme that catalyzes protein O-GlcNAcylation, abolished NO-induced effects. Consistently, adenoviral overexpression of O-GlcNAcase (OGA), the enzyme catalyzing the removal of the O-GlcNAc group, mimicked the effects of OGT knockdown. Finally, compared to eNOS wild type aortic tissues, 26S proteasome reporter mice lacking eNOS exhibited elevated 26S proteasome functionality in parallel with decreased Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation, without changing the levels of Rpt2 protein. In conclusion, the eNOS-derived NO functions as a physiological suppressor of the 26S proteasome in vascular endothelial cells.

Introduction

The ubiquitin proteasome system is the major non-lysosomal degradative machinery responsible for regulated degradation of most intracellular proteins [1], [2]. A key component of this machinery is the 26S proteasome [3] that accounts for recognizing, unfolding, and ultimately destroying proteins. Most proteasome targeted proteins must first be tagged with polyubiquitin chains, generally at the  -NH  group of an internal lysine residue [4], [5]. The 26S proteasome is a 2-MDa complex which made up of two sub-complexes: the catalytic particle (20S proteasome) and the regulatory particle (19S proteasome or PA700) [3]. The 20S proteasome is a cylindrical protease complex consisting of 28 subunits configured into four stacks of heptameric rings. On the other hand, the 19S consists of more than 18 subunits, including 6 putative ATPases and 12 non-ATPase subunits [3], [6]. The 26S proteasome is known to require ATP hydrolysis to degrade ubiquitinated substrates and for its assembly [7]. It emerged that deregulation of the proteasome causes inappropriate destruction or accumulation of specific proteins and ensuing pathological consequences [1]. The proteasome system is now recognized as a regulator of the cell cycle and cell division [8], [9], immune responses and antigen presentation [10], [11], apoptosis [12], and cell signaling [13], [14]. The proteasome has been implicated in certain cancers such as multiple myeloma [15], [16], in neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease, Huntington's disease [17] and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis [18], [19]. In recent years, alteration in 26S proteasomes has been documented in conventional [20], [21], [22], [23] and proteasome reporter [24] mouse models of diabetes. Importantly, a difference in proteasome has been identified in identical twins discordant for diabetes in humans [25], [26]. A common feature of diabetic vascular complications is thought to be endothelial dysfunction, resulting from, at least in part, the reduced bioavailability of nitric oxide (NO) derived from endothelial NO synthase (eNOS). Provided that eNOS is well recognized in endothelial function [27] and the 26S proteasome is increasingly appreciated in endothelial dysfunction [28], it would be important to understand the relationship between eNOS-generated NO and 26S proteasomes. However, it is yet to be established whether NO regulates 26S proteasome functionality in vascular endothelial cells.

NO is a free radical gaseous molecule with a well-described role as a signal transduction messenger molecule in several biological processes such as cell proliferation and apoptosis [29], [30]. Nitric oxide synthase (NOS) mediates a critical rate-limiting step in the production of NO through oxidation of the guanidine nitrogen of arginine. One isoform of the enzyme, eNOS, is a constitutive Ca+2-dependent NOS. Studies suggest that the generation of NO, which functions as an endothelium-derived relaxing factor, plays an important physiologic role in the control of vascular tone [29], [30], [31]. Although the effects of eNOS-derived NO on 26S proteasome functionality are not completely elucidated, the effect of NO on proteasome has drawn increased attention. NO has been found to inhibit the 26S proteasome, resulting in diminished p53 degradation [32] or loss of cell viability [33]. The suppressive effect is mediated by S-nitrosylation and reduced proteasomal subunit expression in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) [34]. However, others report that NO enhances proteasome activity [35] and that the activation promoted by NO donor (DETA-NONOate) is thought to reduce neutral ceramidase [36], [37] or to protect the endothelial cell from damage induced by H O  [38]. It is unclear how to reconcile these discrepancies. One plausible solution could be testing the NO-exerted effects in an appropriate 26S proteasome reporter system in intact cells.

The 26S proteasome functionality can be regulated through mechanisms dependent and/or independent (such as 26S proteasome assembly and/or activation) of proteasomal protease-like activities. Until the first report of imaging 26S proteasome in living cells with a reporter system expressing UbG76V-GFP [39], assessments of 26S proteasome functionality have predominantly relied on the assay of protease-like activities in whole cell lysates or purified 26S proteasomes. UbG76V-GFP was engineered by expressing a surrogate protein substrate (GFP) fused with a ubiquitin mutant (UbG76V) [40]. The UbG76V mutation is crucial because it makes this GFP-bound ubiquitin resistant to removal by deubiquitinase, which would otherwise prevent the GFP from recognition and degradation by 26S proteasomes. Thus, the UbG76V mutation makes the UbG76V-GFP protein a perfect 26S proteasome substrate. As such, protein levels of GFP represent 26S proteasome functionality in cells. As a surrogate proteasome substrate, UbG76V-GFP was initially designed for the assessment of 26S proteasome inhibition in intact cells or mice. This is because when the 26S proteasome is sufficiently suppressed, the otherwise degraded poly Ub-GFP would accumulate to a significant level for quantification of the GFP fluorescence. Accordingly, UbG76V-GFP mice have been used to monitor proteasome inhibition in models of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis [19], Alzheimer's disease [41], and polyglutamine diseases [42]. By taking the advantage of the UbG76V-GFP reporter, together with an additional modification to its detection, we have been able to monitor the enhancement of 26S proteasome functionality in early diabetes and in glucose-treated cultured cells [24]. This has been accomplished by employing a more sensitive approach that has combined ubiquitin enrichment through ubiquitin affinity binding purification followed by Western blotting of the GFP proteins [24].

Physiological regulation of 26S proteasomes are complex which mechanisms remain incompletely understood; however, it is believed that the mechanisms are multifaceted and include post-translational modifications [43]. O-GlcNAc modification was the first endogenous inhibitor of the 26S proteasome identified in cells [44], although the physiological relevance has yet to be established [43]. By utilizing the 26S proteasome reporter (UbG76V-GFP) system both in cultured cells and mice, the present study sought to identify NO, particularly the eNOS-derived, as an endogenous regulator of the 26S proteasome in vascular endothelial cells and the involvement of proteasome O-GlcNAcylation.

Materials and Methods

Reagents

All the antibodies were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA) except for the following: mouse-derived antibody against Rpt2 or other components in the 19S proteasome complex (PA700) from Abcam (Cambridge, MA); anti-O-GlcNAc antibody (CTD110.6 antibody) from Sigma (St Louis, MO); anti-eNOS and anti-phospho-eNOS (Ser1177) Cell Signaling (Danvers, MA). All the chemicals were bought from Fisher Scientific (Pittsburgh, PA) except for the following: fluorogenic proteasome substrates were bought from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA); MG132 from BioMol (Plymouth Meeting, PA); Negative control siRNA or target-specific siRNA duplex against OGT from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA); Protease inhibitor cocktail from Sigma (St Louis, MO); Protein-A Sepharose CL-4B from Amersham Biosciences (Piscataway, NJ); Agarose beads bound with an anti-GFP antibody from Vectorlabs (Burlingame, CA); purified 26S proteasome from Enzo Life Sciences, Inc. (Farmingdale, NY). The Rapid 26S Proteasome Purification Kit (Cat# J4320) was purchased from UBPBio (Ubiquitin-Proteasome Biotechnologies) (Aurora, CO). Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC), bovine aortic endothelial cells (BAEC), HEK273, and UbG76V-GFP cells, as well as their mediums, were obtained from ATCC (Manassas, VA). Adenoviral vector overexpressing O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT), β-N-acetylhexosaminidase/O-GlcNAc hydrolase/O-GlcNAcase (OGA), or Green fluorescent protein (GFP) were prepared as previously described [45], [46] and kindly provided by Dr. Gerald W. Hart from Johns Hopkins University. Adenoviral vector overexpressing eNOS was prepared as described previously [47] and kindly provided by Dr. Donald D. Heistad from the University of Iowa. Plasmids expressing UbG76V-GFP (Addgene plasmid 11954) were prepared [48] and kindly provided by Dr. Nico Dantuma from Karolinska Institutet, Sweden.

Assay of 26S proteasome activity

26S proteasome function was assayed as described previously but with minor modifications [24], [49]. Chymotrypsin-like activity was measured using SucLLVY-7-amido-4-methylcoumarin (AMC). These fluorogenic proteasome substrates were added to the cell lysate at a final concentration of 80 µM in 1% Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). ATP-dependent cleavage activity was monitored continuously by detection of free 7-amido-4-methylcoumarin using a fluorescence plate reader Wallach Victor from PerkinElmer (Waltham, MA) at 380/460 nm at 37°C.

Detection of O-GlcNAc-modified proteins in cell lysates and mouse aortic homogenate

The homogenates or lysates were prepared in lysis buffer containing 25 mM HEPES (pH 7.0), 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% NP-40, 0.1% SDS, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma, St Louis, MO), 1% phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, and 1–100 µM PUGNAc (O-GlcNAcase inhibitor). Proteins modified by O-linked GlcNAc were pulled down by using an Agarose bound Wheat Germ Agglutinin Kit (WGA) according to instructions of the manufacture Vectorlabs (Burlingame, CA) and described previously [50]. In confirming experiments, WGA was replaced by immunoprecipitation with an Agarose beads bound with an anti-O-GlcNAc antibody (CTD110.6) from Sigma (St Louis, MO). In both cases, the proteins were released from the beads by boiling in Laemmli buffer containing 50 mM dithiothreitol and separated by 8% SDS-PAGE. Separated proteins were subjected to Western blot analysis using an anti-Rpt2/PA700 antibody or other antibodies of interest. Alternatively, a modified ELISA protocol according to previous report [51] was used to measure levels of Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation. Briefly, an ELISA Accessory Kit containing all the necessary reagents such as coating buffer and blocking reagent was purchased from Fisher Scientific (Pittsburgh, PA). The ELISA assay was performed with an O-GlcNAc antibody (CD110.6) as a coating antibody, Rpt2-antibody (rabbit) as the 1st antibody, and a rabbit-IgG antibody (goat) conjugated with HRP as the 2nd antibody. The assay was validated at the same condition except for using purified GlcNAc-modified BSA (Vectorlabs: Burlingame, CA) as the standards and BSA-antibody (rabbit) (Fisher Scientific: Pittsburgh, PA) as the 1st antibody.

Endothelial cells and the infection with adenovirus, plasmid, and siRNA duplex

The endothelial cells HUVEC and BAEC were grown at 70–80% confluent and used between passages 3 and 8 as previously reported [20], [52], [53]. Infection with adenovirus encoding OGT, OGA, or GFP (as adenoviral infection control), as described previously [45], [46]. Confluent endothelial cells were infected with transfection-ready plasmid encoding UbG76V-GFP plasmid as previous reported [48]. It is used as well as their control DNA plasmids (pCMV-GFP) according to instructions provided by OriGene (Rockville, MD). Transfection of control or target (OGT) siRNA was performed based on protocols provided by Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA) as described previously [20]. All cells were incubated in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO  at 37°C.

Immunofluorescent staining of endothelial cells for 26S proteasome reporter protein

The cultured endothelial cells were subjected to immunofluorescent staining with a commercial immune-staining kit including ProLong Gold and SlowFade Gold Antifade obtained from Life Technologies (Grand Island, NY). It was achieved by staining GFP (with a primary anti-GFP antibody) or DAPI and a secondary antibody conjugated with a red fluorescent dye Alex Fluor 594 as described previously [24].

Mice and tissue preparations

Male C57BL/6J WT mice, UbG76V-GFP mice, and eNOS−/− mice, 8 weeks of age, 20–30 g, were obtained from the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). Also obtained were breeding pairs of UbG76V-GFP mice and eNOS−/− mice which were used to maintain in-house colonies. UbG76V-GFP mice lacking the eNOS gene were generated through cross and back breeding. Genotypes were confirmed by using the genotyping protocols provided by Jackson Laboratory. Animals were housed under controlled temperature (21°C) and lighting, with 12 hours of light and 12 hours of dark, and had free access to water and a standard mouse chow diet. Mice were handled in accordance with the protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center (Oklahoma City, OK). Aortic tissues of mice were prepared as described previously [24].

Statistical Analysis

Data were reported as mean ± SEM. ANOVA was used to compare means of different experimental groups, and Tukey's Tests were used as post-hoc tests, as previously reported [24]. Data obtained from the time/dose-course studies were analyzed with repeated-measures ANOVA, as previous reported [20]. A p value <0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Results

NO donors increase 26S proteasome reporter protein levels and decrease 26S proteasome activity

To determine 26S proteasome functionality in intact cells, we employed both the 26S proteasome reporter (UbG76V-GFP) cells and the endothelial cells transfected with the 26S proteasome reporter system (UbG76V-GFP). To establish the system for the present study, we compared the reporter protein profiles with or without proteasome blockade of the cells. As expected, in the presence of MG132, a potent and specific proteasome inhibitor, several bands in the Western blot were significantly increased which were recognized by an anti-GFP antibody (Fig. 1A, upper blot), likely representing the accumulated reporter Ub-GFP proteins. To confirm this, we enriched the lysates of the same treated cells with an anti-GFP antibody conjugated agarose and stained with an anti-Ub antibody (Fig. 1A, bottom blot). Like the upper one, the bottom blot demonstrated similar locations of protein bands accumulated when MG132 was present (Fig. 1A, bottom blot). Therefore, the major bands accumulated under proteasome suppression were indeed the 26S proteasome reporter proteins. For ease of detection, levels of 26S proteasome reporter protein were directly assessed by Western blot with an anti-GFP antibody in the rest studies.

To study the effects of NO, we first tested in 26S proteasome reporter cells with SNP (sodium nitroprusside) and DETA-NONOate (Diethylenetriamine NONOate), the widely-accepted NO donors. As shown, in the presence of NO-donors, either SNP or DETA-NONOate, the protein staining of poly-Ub-GFP, the 26S proteasome reporter was significantly increased (Fig. 1B, the 1st and 2nd blots; Fig. S1). Next, we tested with cells that had been incubated with Bradykinin, a well-established vessel dilator that stimulates cells to produce NO among other active factors. We observed that the 26S proteasome reporter proteins were upregulated in the presence of Bradykinin (Fig. 1B, the 3rd blot). This indicated that the endogenous NO elicited the similar effect as the exogenous NO. We also found that the elevation of the reporter poly-Ub-GFP protein levels were accompanied by a reduction in 26S proteasome activities, as reflected by a decrease of chymotrypsin-like activities in the presence of SNP, DETA-NONOate, or Bradykinin (Fig. 1C). Of note, DETA-NONOate at lower range of concentrations, such as 1–10 µM, equivalent of eNOS-generated NO levels, still induced suppression of proteasome activity in a dose-dependent fashion (Fig. S1). These results suggest that stimulation of endogenous NO, or provision of an exogenous NO donor, decreased 26S proteasome functionality, which was associated with the reduction in 26S proteasome activity.

Although the changes in poly-Ub-GFP protein levels were associated with those of proteasome chymotrypsin-like activity, they were not in the same magnitudes. We wondered whether factors beyond proteasome activity could contribute to the functional change (poly-Ub-GFP protein levels). To this end, we tested the association of the regulatory complex (19S/PA700) with the core (20S) proteasome complex, an important process for 26S proteasome activation in vivo. This was achieved by rapid isolation of 26S proteasomes which were then subjected to immune-precipitation with antibody recognizing the 20S proteasome sub-complex. In the 20S sub-complex, we were able to detect decreased Rpt2 (representing the 19S proteasome sub-complex) from SNP- vs vehicle-treated cells (Fig. 2A), suggesting SNP negatively regulated the association between 19S and 20S sub-complexes. To exclude the possibility that SNP might act on NO-independent manner as reported in macrophages [54], [55], we repeated the experiment with DETA-NONOate. As depicted, DETA-NONOate recapitulated the effects of SNP (Fig. 2B). Taken together, NO-mediated suppression of 26S proteasome functionality may be attributable to both the proteasomal (protease-like) activity and the sub-complex association. For convenience of assay and quantification, we used proteasome chymotrypsin-like activity as a representative contributing factor in the rest of the study, along with the assessment of 26S proteasome functionality by the reporter system.

A23187 (eNOS activator) and overexpression of eNOS suppress 26S proteasome functionality in vascular endothelial cells

Next, we investigated whether endogenous NO generated by eNOS exerted the same effects as those by NO donors or stimuli in vascular endothelial cells. To this end, we incubated the Ub-GFP transfected HUVEC with A23187, a well-known activator of the eNOS by increasing intercellular calcium influx. As expected, A23187 increased the protein levels of phosphorylated eNOS, without altering total eNOS protein levels, indicating eNOS activation. An accompanied accumulation of the 26S proteasome reporter protein poly-Ub-GFP was obvious (Fig. 3A), suggesting the compromised 26S proteasome functionality. Indeed, a similar but reciprocal fashion of reduction in 26S proteasome activity was observed (Fig. 3B). To confirm the effect of A23187 did come from eNOS, we repeated part of the experiment but with the presence of L-NG-Nitroarginine methyl ester (L-NAME), a selective inhibitor for all NOS isoforms. L-NAME pre-incubation attenuated both reporter protein accumulation (Fig. 3C) and 26S proteasome activity suppression (Fig. 3D) induced by A23187. To further verify the role of eNOS, we compared the 26S proteasome reporter cells either overexpressing GFP or eNOS. The results showed that the eNOS-overexpressing cells accumulated drastically more poly-Ub-GFP proteins than the GFP-overexpressing cells (Fig. 3E). The accumulation was likely due to a reduction of 26S proteasome activity (Fig. 3F). However, the presence of L-NAME prevented both the accumulation of poly-Ub-GFP (Fig. 3E) and the reduction of proteasome activities (Fig. 3F). In sum, these results suggest that eNOS activation blocked 26S proteasome functionality which was associated with a reduction in 26S proteasome activity and 26S proteasome sub-complex association in HUVECs.

NO enhances the immunochemical staining of 26S proteasome reporter proteins in endothelial cells

We took one step further to determine whether the targeted GFP protein presented in specific cellular locations in the presence of NO donors. This was achieved by immunochemical staining of GFP protein using a GFP primary antibody and a secondary antibody conjugated with a red fluorescent dye (Alex Fluor 594). Compared to the vehicle-treated Ub-GFP-expressing endothelial cells, the NO donor-treated cells either by SNP or Bradykinin presented a globally enhanced immunochemical staining (Fig. 4A and 4B). The same results were obtained when NO donors were substituted with A23187, the eNOS activator (Fig. 4A and 4B). The suppressive trait of NO, as quantified by the accumulated protein staining (Fig. 4C), was in line with the upregulation of the reporter protein (Fig. 1 and Fig. 3) and downregulation of the 26S proteasome activity (Fig. 1 and Fig. 3) or activation (Fig. 2). Thus, the immunochemical results supported the inhibitory effect of NO on endothelial 26S proteasome functionality and the blockade was not restricted to certain cellular compartments.

NO at high concentrations inhibits chymotrypsin-like activity of the purified 26S proteasomes

NO has been shown to suppress proteasome activity in VSMC by S-nitrosylation, an effect generated through a direct contact of abundant NO with the proteasomes [34]. We asked whether direct interaction of NO with 26S proteasomes would lead to 26S proteasome suppression in endothelial cells. So we incubated NO donors with isolated 26S proteasomes which had been purified to 98% from human erythrocytes (product datasheet from the manufacture). As depicted, the NO donor SNP reduced 26S proteasome activity in a dose dependent fashion, particularly at very high concentrations of SNP (Fig. 5A). Similar results were obtained when another structurally unrelated NO donor DETA-NONOate was tested, which is known to have a longer half live and elicit a stronger effect than SNP (Fig. 5B). Together, these results suggest that a direct suppressive impact on 26S proteasome functionality only occurs when high or physiological-incompatible concentrations of NO are present. Therefore, the suppression of 26S proteasomes induced by eNOS-derive NO in intact cells might result from an alternative mechanism requiring a mediator.

NO increases O-GlcNAc modifications of Rpt2

We wondered whether NO-induced suppression of 26S proteasome functionality attributed to an intrinsic mechanism that blocks 26S proteasomes. In addition to nitrosylation of 26S proteasomes, the only other endogenous inhibitor identified so far is believed to be the O-GlcNAc modification Rpt2, a key component of the regulatory complex (19S) of the 26S proteasome and an ATPase [44]. Although other subunits of proteasome may also be modified by O-GlcNAc, O-GlcNAcylation of Rpt2 has been demonstrated to be essential in regulating 26S functionality [44]. We explored whether cellular NO regulated Rpt2 O-GlcNAc modifications. O-GlcNAc modification or O-GlcNAcylation is an essential cycling modification consisting of a single O-linked N-Acetylglucosamine sugar attached to the serine or threonine residues of nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins [56]. To detect O-GlcNAcylation, we followed the WGA Kit protocol [50] to enrich the O-GlcNAcylated proteins which were then probed with either an anti-Rpt2 antibody or antibodies respectively against other proteasome complex subunits. The Western blotting showed that administration of SNP in HUVEC increased the staining for O-GlcNAcylated Rpt2 protein (Fig. 6A), without changing total Rpt2 protein levels (Fig. 6A). Like SNP, incubation with Bradykinin in same type of cells presented similar enhancement of Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation (Fig. 6A). Furthermore, the blocking effects of L-NAME either on A23187 (Fig. S2A) or Bradykinin (Fig. S2B) indicated eNOS-mediated impact on Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation. Indeed, activation of eNOS by A23187 (Fig. 6A) or by adenoviral overexpressing eNOS (Fig. 6B) mimicked the NO-elicited effects on Rpt2 modification. However, levels of O-GlcNAc modification of other subunits either were not detected (Fig. 6A, β7) or presented no significant changes (Fig. 6A, Rpt4 and Rpt6). To confirm the results of Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation obtained through WGA approach, we performed immunoprecipitation using an anti-O-GlcNAc antibody (CTD110.6). A dramatic increase of Rpt2 staining was found in the O-GlcNAc-coimmunoprecipitates from cells treated with NO donors, such as SNP (Fig. 6C) and DETA-NONOate (Fig. 6D), or with eNOS activator-treated cells (Fig. 6C). The upregulation of Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation was further confirmed by using ELISA (Fig. S3). Since these effects were similar to those using WGA (Fig. 6A), we employed WGA in the rest of the study. Overall, the NO-mediated upregulation in O-GlcNAc modification of Rpt2, but not other tested subunits, was closely correlated with the downregulation in 26S proteasome functionality demonstrated earlier (Figs. 1 and 2).

OGT mediates NO-elicited effects on 26S proteasomes

OGT is one of the two dynamic enzymes which directly control O-GlcNAc modification. Specifically, OGT catalyzes O-GlcNAcylation. Increasing evidence support a crucial role of OGT in the regulation of intracellular protein O-GlcNAcylation. We wondered whether OGT was required for NO-mediated Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation and proteasome suppression in vascular endothelial cells. To answer this question, we took the loss-of-function approach with siRNA infection. As anticipated, OGT- but not the control-siRNA treatment significantly reduced the protein levels of OGT (Fig. 7A). Like the effects in non-siRNA treated cells, treatment in control siRNA-treated cells either with SNP (Fig. 7A) or Bradykinin (Fig. 7B) increased Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation. However, such an increase was abolished in OGT siRNA-treated cells (Fig. 7A and 7B). Likewise, the accumulation of the 26S proteasome reporter protein poly-Ub-GFP caused by A23187 was apparent in control siRNA-treated cells, but not in OGT-siRNA-treated cells (Fig. 7C). Such diminished accumulation was indicative for restoration of 26S proteasome functionality, likely due to a recovery of the chymotrypsin-like protease activity when OGT was absent (Fig. 7D, 7E, and 7F). Collectively, these data implicated that OGT was involved in NO-mediated upregulation of Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation and suppression of 26S proteasomes.

Upregulation of OGT alone suppresses 26S proteasome functionality

To confirm the role of OGT in NO-mediated effects, we adopted a gain-of-function approach so that we could determine if upregulation of OGT alone would mimic the effects of NO on 26S proteasome regulation. The most important factor regulating OGT activity within the cell is believed to be the level of UDP-GlcNAc which can be induced by glucosamine [57], [58]. Therefore, we first compared the 26S proteasome functionality in cells with or without the presence of glucosamine. As being shown, administration of glucosamine alone increased poly-Ub-GFP protein levels in a time dependent manner (Fig. 8A), indicating 26S proteasome blockade. In a similar fashion, glucosamine treatment increased O-GlcNAc modified protein levels (Fig. 8B) and reduced 26S proteasome activity (Fig. 8C), which were accompanied by an increase of Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation significantly at 4 h (Fig. 8A). To further confirm the role of OGT in these effects, we compared cells overexpressing GFP and OGT through adenoviral infection. As expected, overexpression of OGT vs GFP increased poly-Ub-GFP protein levels (indicative of 26S proteasome blockade), which was associated with increased O-GlcNAc-Rpt2 (Fig. 8D) and decreased proteasome activity (Fig. 8E). Taken together, OGT upregulation led to 26S proteasome blockade, likely through the increased Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation and decreased proteasome chymotrypsin-like activity.

Upregulation of OGA through overexpression mimics the effects of OGT- knocking down in endothelial cells

OGA, the other important enzyme besides OGT that regulates O-GlcNAc recycling, catalyzes the removal of O-GlcNAc modification. We thus speculated that upregulation of OGA would mimic the effects of OGT-siRNA knockdown on 26S proteasome functionality and share similar mechanisms. To achieve this, we first compared 26S proteasome reporter protein levels, activity and the O-GlcNAc modification of Rpt2 in endothelial cells treated either with control or OGT siRNA. As depicted, cells with OGT siRNA infection presented lower levels both in Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation and reporter protein accumulation than those with GFP (Fig. 9A). However, neither treatment affected Rpt2 protein levels (Fig. 9A). In addition, these effects were associated with elevated 26S proteasome activity (Fig. 9B). Next, we repeated the same experiments but in cells overexpressing GFP or OGA. The results demonstrated that cells with OGA overexpression presented less Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation and reporter protein accumulation than those overexpressing GFP (Fig. 9C). The Rpt2 protein levels, however, were not affected (Fig. 9C). Again, overexpression of OGA was associated with the increased 26S proteasome activity (Fig. 9D).

Overexpression of OGA reverses NO-induced Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation

To determine whether OGA overexpression would reverse the studied effects of NO, we first compared the levels of Rpt2 O-GlcNAc modifications between cells overexpressing GFP and OGA. As predicted, overexpression of OGA not GFP markedly increased OGA protein staining (Fig. 10A, 10B, and 10C). Similar to previous results, SNP elevated Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation in GFP-overexpressing cells, but not in OGA-overexpressing cells (Fig. 10A). The effects exerted by OGA overexpression were reproduced when SNP was replaced either by Bradykinin (Fig. 10B) or A23187 (Fig. 10C). Consistent with these results, overexpression of eNOS increased Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation (Fig. 10D) in GFP but not in OGA-overexpressing cells (Fig. 10D).

OGA upregulation restores NO-suppressed 26S proteasome functionality

We next determined whether OGA overexpression that blocked NO-induced Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation would restore 26S proteasome functionality. To this end, we measured both the poly-Ub-GFP protein levels and the 26S proteasome activity in these cells. As expected, incubation of the cells respectively with SNP (Fig. 11A), Bradykinin (Fig. 11B), and A23187 (Fig. 11C) significantly accumulated proteasome reporter protein levels in GFP- but not in OGA-overexpressing cells (Fig. 11A, 11B, and 11C). In agreement with these results, treatment with SNP (Fig. 11D), Bradykinin (Fig. 11E), or A23187 (Fig. 11F) inhibited 26S proteasome activity in cells overexpressing GFP but not OGA (Fig. 11D, 11E, and 11F). Together, these data indicated that by modulating O-GlcNAc modification, likely of Rpt2, OGA upregulation abolished NO-elicited effects on 26S proteasome functionality.

The 26S proteasome functionality is augmented in isolated aortic tissues of eNOS−/− vs eNOS+/+ mice, which is associated with reduction of O-GlcNAc-Rpt2 and enhancement of proteasome activity

To determine if endogenous NO generated by eNOS is essential in maintaining basal 26S proteasome functionality, we generated 26S proteasome reporter mice lacking eNOS, which were confirmed through genotyping (Fig. 12A) and the levels of eNOS protein expression (Fig. 12B), where eNOS protein was undetectable in eNOS−/− aortic tissues, levels of β-actin were unchanged regardless of the absence or presence of eNOS (Fig. 12B).We collected aortic tissues of age and gender matched 26S proteasome reporter mice with or without eNOS deletion. As demonstrated, the protein levels of poly Ub-GFP were reduced when eNOS was absent, suggesting enhanced 26S proteasome functionality that was negatively regulated by eNOS (Fig. 12B). Importantly, the enhanced functionality of the 26S proteasome was associated with a reduction in O-GlcNAc modification of Rpt2 (Fig. 12C) and an increase in proteasome chymotrypsin-like activity (Fig. 12D) in eNOS−/− aortas. However, O-GlcNAc modification of selected proteasome subunit, such as β7, was not detected, although the input protein was detectable (Fig. 12C). These data implicated that endogenous eNOS-derived NO maintained low basal levels of 26S proteasome activity, likely through O-GlcNAc modification of Rpt2.

Discussion

With a 26S proteasome reporter system, this study has identified a new mechanism by which NO affects 26S proteasome functionality in vascular endothelial cells (Fig. 12E). The presented evidence supports an alternative pathway where eNOS-derived NO blocks 26S proteasome functionality through OGT, the essential enzyme that upregulates protein O-GlcNAc modification. Mechanistically, like NO donors, the eNOS-generated NO increased an OGT-dependent O-GlcNAc modification, likely of Rpt2, one of the subunit of the proteasome regulatory complex (the 19S proteasome). In spite of various sources of NO, both NO donors and eNOS-generated NO blocked the 26S proteasome functionality and shared the same pathway, indicating the essential role of NO in 26S proteasomes regulation which was truly suppressive. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of NO-elicited effects on 26S proteasome functionality with a reporter cellular system as well as a reporter mouse model in vivo. Furthermore, this is also the first evidence for the connection of a metabolic/nutrient sensor (OGT) between a vascular endothelial protective molecule (the eNOS-derived NO) and the quality control machinery for regulated protein turnover.

Despite an intensive research effort, it remains uncertain how 26S proteasome functionality is regulated under physiological or pathological conditions. Given the well-established effects of NO on important cellular processes including proliferation and apoptosis [29], [30], this radical gaseous molecule receives an increased appreciation for its potential role in 26S proteasome regulation. NO has been reported to suppress 26S proteasomes causing p53 accumulation/apoptosis in microphages [32] or p21 accumulation in VSMC [59]. Likewise, through (S-nitrosylation) suppression of the proteasomal degradation, NO maintains FLIP protein stability to prevent apoptosis in cultured human bronchial epithelial cells [60]. Mechanism underlying the suppressive effect of NO on the 26S proteasome has not been completely elucidated but likely includes post-translational modification, e.g., S-nitrosylation of the 26S proteasomes in VSMC [34], [61]; transcription regulation, e.g., the decreased gene expression of PA28, a proteasome regulatory subunit, in vasculature [61]; or involvement of other required mediators, e.g., a caspase 3 [33], a GSK-3β for IRS-2 stability [62], or a Ser/Thr phosphatase [59]. Since independent studies have shown a potential connection of OGT to gene transcriptional regulation and GSK, it would be interesting to explore whether OGT is involved in the suppressive effect of NO on 26S proteasomes as reported [32], [33], [34], [59], [60], [61], [62]. However, the opposite results have been reported regarding the effect of NO on 26S proteasomes [35], [36], [37], [38]. It is yet unknown whether the discrepancy attributes to difference in cell types or the presence of extra reactive oxygen species, e.g., hydrogen peroxide, in some of the studies [35], [36], [37], [38]. What is clear is that a 26S proteasome reporter system has not been used in any studies on NO-mediated 26S proteasome functionality. Therefore, results demonstrated in the present study may help to clarify uncertainties or controversies concerning NO-exerted effects on 26S proteasome functionality in endothelial cells.

Another novel aspect of this study was the demonstration of OGT and its connection to NO-mediated impacts on 26S proteasomes. The present study showed that NO functioned as a physiological suppressor of 26S proteasome functionality via an OGT-dependent mechanism involving O-GlcNAc modification, likely on proteasomal Rpt2 protein in vascular endothelial cells. O-GlcNAcylation is the O-linked attachment of N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) onto Ser/Thr residues of cytosolic and nuclear proteins, catalyzed by OGT [63]. O-GlcNAcylation has been believed to be an important regulatory mechanism for signal transduction [63], [64], [65], [66]. Although mechanisms underlying OGT regulation are not well understood, OGT-mediated O-GlcNAcylation has drawn increased attention. To date, more than 80 different proteins including transcription factors, kinases, phosphatases, cytoskeletal proteins, nuclear hormone receptors, nuclear pore proteins, signal transduction molecules, and actin regulatory proteins [65], [66] have been shown to undergo O-GlcNAcylation [66]. A proteomic study in fruit flies demonstrated that several proteins in the 26S proteasome can be extensively O-GlcNAcylated [67]. There is evidence that the 19S subunit can be subjected to O-GlcNAcylation with consequent 26S proteasome inhibition [44]. Mechanistically, Rpt2, an ATPase and a key component of the regulatory sub-complex of 26S proteasomes, is modified by O-GlcNAc both in vitro and in vivo; interestingly, as its modification increases, the 26S proteasome function decreases, through a mechanism involving ATPase and OGT [44]. Hence, O-GlcNAc modification is considered an endogenous inhibitor of the 26S proteasome [44] and O-GlcNAc modification connects a nutritional sensor to proteasome functional regulation [68]. In line with these findings, we found that OGT is essential in mediating NO-dependent 26S proteasome suppression both in cultured cells and aortas of the eNOS-KO mice, likely through the control of Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation. Conversely, suppression of OGT or overexpression of OGA prevented the NO-mediated effects on 26S proteasomes. OGT appears to be crucial for this event, since NO-mediated 26S proteasome inhibition is blocked by siRNA-mediated OGT downregulation. The most conclusive evidence that eNOS-derived NO suppresses the 26S proteasome comes from analysis of aortas from eNOS-/- mice. We found that, compared to WT aortic tissues, eNOS−/− mice exhibit elevated 26S proteasome activity in parallel with decreased Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation. All these data suggest the axis of NO-OGT/OGA-Rpt2-O-GlcNAcylation is truly associated with the regulation of 26S proteasome functionality. Yet, the decisive role for O-GlcNAc modification of Rpt2 in this axis has yet to be established, because other subunits of proteasome, such as 20S subcomplex [69], are potentially targets of O-GlcNAcylation [68]. Nevertheless, the present study supports the notion that eNOS-derived NO, an endothelial protective molecule at basal low concentration, maintains a basal low 26S proteasome functionality, which is achieved possibly through keeping Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylated and in turn, keeping the 26S proteasome at minimal levels of functionality in endothelial cells.

The next novel aspect of the study was the generation of 26S proteasome reporter mice with eNOS deleted. With this approach, an intrinsic inhibitory role of eNOS on 26S proteasome functionality was uncovered in whole animal in vivo in the present study. Interestingly, eNOS, the enzyme that maintains the basal and physiological levels of NO in endothelial cells, can be a target of proteasome [70]. Thus, the endogenous inhibitory potential of NO to 26S proteasomes could be a line of self-defense against degradation so that eNOS remains functionally active, although long term inhibition of proteasome generates the opposite effects [71]. The identification of such a role for NO may add an alternative mechanism to peroxynitrite-mediated 26S proteasome activation in animal models in vivo [23], since formation of peroxynitrite in the presence of excessive superoxide will dramatically reduce NO bioavailability [72], thus compromise the suppressive impact of NO on proteasome. The generations of proteasome reporter eNOS-knockout mice will also help to identify factor that relates to OGT and mediates NO-dependent 26S proteasome regulation in vasculature. It remains obscure how eNOS-derived NO affects OGT in endothelial cells. OGT activity can be regulated at several levels, including transcription, splicing, translation, protein stability, and post-translational modifications [73]. Among them, S-nitrosylation is likely the mechanism that associates with a direct impact from NO, although higher concentrations of NO may be required for S-nitrosylation [74], [75], [76]. Recently, S-nitrosylation was shown to suppress OGT, because the removal of the nitrosyl group activated OGT in polysaccharide-treated macrophages [77]. Such an inhibitory mechanism could not explain the indispensable role of OGT in NO-elicited effects (Fig. 7), suggesting that other mechanism would apply. HSP90 seems involved in OGT turnover because inactivation of HSP90 reduces OGT protein stability [78]. As a client protein of HSP90, eNOS is positively regulated by HSP90 through strong interaction [79], [80], [81], although the interaction may inactivate HSP90 [82], [83], likely serving as a negative feedback mechanism by NO [84]. As such, it would be interesting to determine whether the regulation of OGT by eNOS or eNOS-derive NO involves HSP90. Further, emerging evidence shows that OGT may be regulated by the interaction with its target, such as p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase [85] or a proteasome regulatory complex [86]. An increase in the association of OGT with Rpt2 was detected when NO was present (Liu et al, unpublished data), in parallel with an increase in Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation (Fig.6). Alternatively, the increased levels of intracellular UDP-GlcNAc have been found to enhance OGT activity leading to upregulated O-GlcNAcylation of the target proteins [57], [58]. In line with these observations, our study demonstrated that incubation with exogenous glucosamine mimicked the NO-mediated effects in endothelial cells (Fig. 8A, 8B and 8C), while NO donors increased the expression of O-GlcNAcylated proteins (data not shown). It warrants further investigation to determine how eNOS and eNOS-derived NO through their mediator regulate OGT and O-GlcNAc levels in vascular endothelial cells.

In conclusion, the present study provides the first evidence that NO functions as a physiological suppressor of the 26S proteasome in vascular endothelial cells, a mechanism that may bridge an essential endothelial regulator (NO) with the metabolic (OGT) sensors and the protein quality control machinery (26S proteasomes). Although it has yet to establish that 26S proteasome functionality mediates the vascular protective effects of eNOS-derived NO, mechanisms identified in the present study could advance our understanding of 26S proteasome regulation and may facilitate the identification of new therapeutic targets for proteasome associated diseases.

Supporting Information

DETA-NONOate decreases 26S proteasome functionality in a dose-dependent manner (at the range of 1–10 µM). The UbG76V-GFP-expressing cells were incubated with DETA NONOate (1–10 µM) for 4 h followed by Western blotting of the 26S proteasome reporter protein poly-Ub-GFP by using a rabbit-derived anti-GFP antibody, with GFP enrichment by agarose bead conjugated with an anti-GFP antibody. * represent p<0.05 vs control (0 h) (n = 3), otherwise, not significant. DETA NONOate: Diethylenetriamine NONOate; Ub-GFP: ubiquitin-green fluorescent protein.. (PDF). Click here for additional data file. 
Incubation with L-NAME blocks the O-GlcNAc modification of Rpt2 induced by A23187 or Bradykinin in endothelial cells. HUVEC respectively treated with (A) A23187 (1 µM) and (B) Bradykinin (1 µM) after pre-incubated with L-NAME (1 mM) for 1 h. Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation was determined by blotting Rpt2 of the O-GlcNAc-coimmunoprecipitates (O-GlcNAc antibody: CD110.6). * represent p<0.05 vs control (n = 3), otherwise, not significant. Ctrl, control; L-NAME, L-NG-Nitroarginine methyl ester.. (PDF). Click here for additional data file. 
Quantification of Rpt2 O-GlcNAc modification by ELISA in endothelial cells. The cell lysates of HUVEC being treated respectively with SNP (50 µM), Bradykinin (1 µM), A23187 (1 µM), and DETA-NONOate (10 µM) for 4 h were subjected to ELISA assay. An ELISA Accessory Kit containing all the necessary reagents such as coating buffer and blocking reagent was purchased from Fisher Scientific (Pittsburgh, PA). The ELISA assay was performed with an O-GlcNAc antibody (CD110.6) as a coating antibody, Rpt2-antibody (rabbit) as the 1st antibody, and a rabbit-IgG antibody (goat) conjugated with HRP as the 2nd antibody. The assay was validated at the same condition except for using purified GlcNAc-modified BSA (Vectorlabs: Burlingame, CA) as the standards and BSA-antibody (rabbit) (Fisher Scientific: Pittsburgh, PA) as the 1st antibody. Only the validated results for the tested samples were presented. * represent p<0.05 vs control (n = 3), otherwise, not significant. Ctrl, control; DETA-NONOate, Diethylenetriamine NONOate; SNP, sodium nitroprusside.. (PDF). Click here for additional data file. 

Figure 1

The UbG76V-GFP-expressing cells were incubated with (A) MG132 (0.5 µM), or vehicle (DMSO, 0.5%) for 24 h followed by Western blotting of the 26S proteasome reporter protein poly-Ub-GFP by using a rabbit-derived anti-GFP antibody, with or without GFP enrichment by agarose bead conjugated with an anti-GFP antibody. The same type of cells were also incubated with SNP (50 µM), DETA-NONOate (50 µM), or Bradykinin (1 µM) for indicated time up to 4 h. The cell lysate were subjected to (B) Western blotting of reporter proteins with an anti-GFP antibody and to (C) 26S proteasome activity assay by measuring the chymotrypsin-like activity of the cell lysates. The shown blots were representative of at least 3 independent experiments with similar results. * represent p<0.05 vs control (0 h) (n = 3), otherwise, not significant. An overlaid portion (less exposure) of each whole blot in (B) indicating Ub-GFP is presented. DETA-NONOate, Diethylenetriamine NONOate; DMSO, dimethyl sulfoxide; SNP, sodium nitroprusside; Ub-GFP, ubiquitin-green fluorescent protein.

Figure 2

The HUVEC were incubated with (A) SNP (50 µM) for 0.5 h or (B) DETA-NONOate (10 µM) for 0.5 h followed by isolation of intact 26S proteasomes which were then subjected to immunoprecipitation using agarose immobilized with antibody recognizing the 20S proteasome subcomplex (Enzo Life Sciences, Farmingdale, NY; Cat# BML-PW1075). Rpt2 was detected via Western blotting on the immunoprecipitates of 20S proteasome subcomplex. Purification of intact 26S proteasomes was conducted according to the instruction of the manufacture (UBPBio, Aurora, CO; Rapid 26S Proteasome Purification Kit; Cat# J4320). p<0.05 vs control (n = 3). Ctrl, control; SNP, sodium nitroprusside.

Figure 3

The UbG76V-GFP-expressing HUVEC were incubated with (A) A23187 (1 µM) for indicated time up to 4 h and the 26S proteasome reporter protein poly-Ub-GFP was stained with a rabbit-derived anti-GFP antibody, total eNOS and p-eNOS (Ser 1177) was stained with respective antibodies through Western blot. (B) Assay of the chymotrypsin-like activity. (C) Preincubation of L-NAME (1 mM) abolished A23187 enhanced reporter protein accumulation. (D) The chymotrypsin-like activity. (E) Adenoviral overexpression eNOS increased the 26S proteasome reporter protein poly-Ub-GFP, which was prevented by preincubation of L-NAME (1 mM) for 1 h. (F) The chymotrypsin-like activity. The presented blots were representative of at least 3 independent experiments with similar results. * represent p<0.05 vs control or 0 h (n = 3). An overlaid portion (less exposure) of each whole blot indicating Ub-GFP is presented. Ad-, Adenoviral overexpression; NS, not significant (v.s. control); Ub-GFP, ubiquitin-green fluorescent protein; eNOS, endothelial nitric oxide synthase; L-NAME, L-NG-Nitroarginine methyl ester.

Figure 4

UbG76V-GFP-expressing HUVEC were respectively treated with control (vehicle buffer), SNP, Bradykinin, and A23187 for 1h and subjected to immunofluorescent staining with a commercial immune-staining kit including ProLong Gold and SlowFade Gold Antifade for GFP (with a primary anti-GFP antibody) or DAPI and a secondary antibody conjugated with a red fluorescent dye, Alex Fluor 594 at (A) low and (B) high-power fields of the same slides. All images shown are representative of three independent experiments. (C) Quantification results of (B). * represent p<0.05 vs control (n = 3). Ctrl, control; DAPI, 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; SNP, sodium nitroprusside; Ub-GFP, ubiquitin-green fluorescent protein.

Figure 5

(A) SNP decreased the chymotrypsin-like activity of the purified 26S proteasome. (B) DETA-NONOate reduced the chymotrypsin-like activity of the purified 26S proteasome. The purified 26S proteasome (Enzo Life Sciences, Inc) were incubated with SNP or DETA-NONOate at indicated concentrations up to 1000 µM for 0.5 h followed by assay of the chymotrypsin-like activity. * represent p<0.05 vs control (n = 3). DETA-NONOate, Diethylenetriamine NONOate; SNP, sodium nitroprusside.

Figure 6

(A) HUVEC respectively treated with A23187, Bradykinin, and SNP presented increased O-GlcNAc modification of Rpt2 without altering total Rpt2 protein levels. (B) Overexpression of eNOS but not GFP upregulated Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation without changing the levels of total Rpt2 protein. Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation was detected with the WGA protocol. (C) Confirming Rpt2-GlcNAcylation by repeating experiments in (A) but using an O-GlcNAc antibody (CD110.6) to pull down O-GlcNAcylated proteins. (D) Confirming the effect of NO on Rpt2-GlcNAcylation by repeating experiments in (C) but with DETA-NONOate. The shown blots were representative of at least 3 independent experiments with similar results. * represent p<0.05 vs control (n = 3), otherwise, not significant. Ad-, Adenoviral overexpression; Ctrl, control; SNP, sodium nitroprusside; WGA, wheat germ agglutinin; GFP, green fluorescent protein; eNOS, endothelial nitric oxide synthase.

Figure 7

OGT siRNA knockdown abolished the proteasome reporter protein accumulation and Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation induced by (A) SNP; (B) Bradykinin; and (C) A23187. Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation was detected with the WGA protocol. The shown blots were representative of at least 3 independent experiments with similar results. OGT knockdown by siRNA restored 26S proteasome activity in cell treated with (D) SNP; (E) Bradykinin; and (F) A23187. 26S proteasome activity was quantified by measuring chymotrypsin-like activity in the cell lysates. * represent p<0.05 vs control (n = 3). An overlaid portion (less exposure) of each whole blot indicating Ub-GFP is presented. Ctrl, control (scrambled) siRNA; NS, not significant (v.s. control); OGT, O-GlcNAc transferase; SNP, sodium nitroprusside; Ub-GFP, ubiquitin-green fluorescent protein; WGA, wheat germ agglutinin.

Figure 8

The UbG76V-GFP-transfected HUVEC were treated with vehicle (medium) and glucosamine (5 mM) for indicated time up to 4h and followed by (A) quantifications of poly-Ub-GFP protein levels with an anti-GFP antibody and O-GlcNAc modification of Rpt2 with an anti-Rpt2 antibody (on WGA pull-down) in Western blot; (B) Western blotting of global O-GlcNAc modified proteins with an anti-O-GlcNAc antibody; (C) proteasomal chymotrypsin-like activity assay. (D) Overexpression of OGT not GFP increased both Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation and the levels of reporter protein. (E) Chymotrypsin-like activity in GFP- and OGT-overexpressing cells. The blots shown were representative of 3 independent experiments with similar results. * represents p<0.05 vs the control (n = 3). An overlaid portion (less exposure) of each whole blot indicating Ub-GFP is presented. Ub-GFP, ubiquitin-green fluorescent protein; OGT, O-GlcNAc transferase; UDP-GlcNAc, Uridine diphosphate-GlcNAc; WGA, wheat germ agglutinin.

Figure 9

(A) UbG76V-GFP-expressing HUVEC were transfected either with control or OGA siRNA and cell lysates were subjected to Western blot to detect reporter protein levels and Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation. (B) chymotrypsin-like activity in siRNA treated cells. (C) Adenoviral overexpression of OGA, not GFP, decreased both the levels of reporter protein and Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation. (D) chymotrypsin-like activity in adenovirus infected cells. The blots shown were representative of 3 independent experiments with similar results. * represents p<0.05 vs the control (n = 3). An overlaid portion (less exposure) of each whole blot indicating Ub-GFP is presented. Ctrl, control (scrambled) siRNA; OGA, O-GlcNAcase; OGT, O-GlcNAc transferase; Ub-GFP, ubiquitin-green fluorescent protein; WGA, wheat germ agglutinin.

Figure 10

Adenoviral overexpression of OGA abolished Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation induced by (A) SNP; (B) Bradykinin; (C) A23187; and (D) overexpression of eNOS. Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation was detected with the WGA protocol. The shown blots were representative of at least 3 independent experiments with similar results. Ad-, Adenoviral overexpression; eNOS, endothelial nitric oxide synthase; NS, not significant (v.s. control); OGA, O-GlcNAcase; SNP, sodium nitroprusside; WGA, wheat germ agglutinin.

Figure 11

Adenoviral overexpression of OGA prevented the proteasome reporter protein accumulation induced by (A) SNP; (B) Bradykinin; and (C) A23187. GOA upregulation via overexpression restored 26S proteasome activity which was otherwise inhibited by (D) SNP; (E) Bradykinin; and (F) A23187. 26S proteasome activity was quantified by measuring chymotrypsin-like activity in the cell lysates. * represent p<0.05 vs control (n = 3). An overlaid portion (less exposure) of each whole blot indicating Ub-GFP is presented. Ad-, Adenoviral overexpression; NS, not significant (v.s. control); OGA, O-GlcNAcase; SNP, sodium nitroprusside; Ub-GFP, ubiquitin-green fluorescent protein.

Figure 12

(A) Genotyping of wild type (C57BL/6J) mice, UbG76V-GFP (eNSO wild type) mice, and UbG76V-GFP mice lacking eNOS by PCR analysis. (B) Gender (male) and age (12 weeks) matched wild type mice, UbG76V-GFP/eNOS+/+ mice, and UbG76V-GFP/eNOS−/− mice (n = 5/group) were used. The 26S proteasome reporter protein poly-Ub-GFP was stained with a rabbit-derived anti-GFP antibody through Western blot. The eNOS protein of the aortic tissues was detectable in eNOS+/+ but not eNOS−/− mice. (C) Aortic tissues of the eNOS−/− vs WT mice exhibited a decrease in Rpt2 O-GlcNAcylation, without changing the protein levels total Rpt2 and β7. (D) The 26S proteasome activity (chymotrypsin-like activity) was significantly higher in eNOS−/− vs WT mouse aortic tissues. (E) Proposed mechanisms of 26S proteasome regulation by eNOS-derived NO in vascular endothelial cells. In vascular endothelial cells, the eNOS-derived NO, which has been known to be expressed constitutively at low basal levels, maintains basal functionality of the 26S proteasome. This was achieved through an OGT-dependent O-GlcNAc modification of proteasome, likely on Rpt2, a key subunit of the proteasome regulatory complex recognized for this type of modification and associated with 26S proteasome function. The supporting evidence was obtained through either genetic or pharmacologic approaches both in 26S proteasome reporter cell and mouse models. eNOS, endothelial nitric oxide synthase; OGT, O-GlcNAc transferase; SNP, sodium nitroprusside; WGA, wheat germ agglutinin; WT, wild type.

