Human knockouts and phenotypic analysis in a cohort with a high rate of consanguinity

Abstract

A major goal of biomedicine is to understand the function of every gene in the human genome.1 Loss-of-function (LoF) mutations can disrupt both copies of a given gene in humans and phenotypic analysis of such ‘human knockouts’ can provide insight into gene function. Consanguineous unions are more likely to result in offspring who carry LoF mutations in a homozygous state. In Pakistan, consanguinity rates are notably high.2 Here, we sequenced the protein-coding regions of 10,503 adult participants in the Pakistan Risk of Myocardial Infarction Study (PROMIS) designed to understand the determinants of cardiometabolic diseases in South Asians.3 We identified individuals carrying predicted LoF (pLoF) mutations in the homozygous state, and performed phenotypic analysis involving >200 biochemical and disease traits. We enumerated 49,138 rare (<1 % minor allele frequency) pLoF mutations. These pLoF mutations are predicted to knock out 1,317 genes in at least one participant. Homozygosity for pLoF mutations at PLAG27 was associated with absent enzymatic activity of soluble lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2; at CYP2F1, with higher plasma interleukin-8 concentrations; at TREH, with lower concentrations of apoB-containing lipoprotein subfractions; at either A3GALT2 or NRG4, with markedly reduced plasma insulin C-peptide concentrations; and at SLC9A3R1, with mediators of calcium and phosphate signaling. Finally, APOC3 is a gene which retards clearance of plasma triglyceride-rich lipoproteins and where heterozygous deficiency confers protection against coronary heart disease.4,5 In Pakistan, we now observe APOC3 homozygous pLoF carriers; we recalled these knockout humans and challenged with an oral fat load. Compared with wild-type family members, APOC3 knockouts displayed marked blunting of the usual post-prandial rise in plasma triglycerides. Overall, these observations provide a roadmap for a ‘human knockout project’, a systematic effort to understand the phenotypic consequences of complete disruption of genes in humans.

Across all participants (Table 1), exome sequencing yielded 1,639,223 exonic and splice-site sequence variants in 19,026 autosomal genes that passed initial quality control metrics. Of these, 57,137 mutations across 14,345 autosomal genes were annotated as pLoF mutations (i.e., nonsense, frameshift, or canonical splice-site mutations predicted to inactivate a gene). To increase the probability that mutations annotated as pLoF by automated algorithms are bona fide, we removed nonsense and frameshift mutations occurring within the last 5% of the transcript and within exons flanked by non-canonical splice sites, splice site mutations at small (<15 bp) introns, at non-canonical splice sites, and where the purported pLoF allele is observed across primates. Common pLoF alleles are less likely to exert strong functional effects as they are less constrained by purifying selection; thus, we define pLoF mutations in the rest of the manuscript as variants with a minor allele frequency (MAF) of < 1% and passing the aforementioned bioinformatic filters. Applying these criteria, we generated a set of 49,138 pLoF mutations across 13,074 autosomal genes. The site-frequency spectrum for these pLoF mutations revealed that the majority was seen only in one or a few individuals (Extended Data Fig. 1).

Across all 10,503 PROMIS participants, both copies of 1,317 distinct genes were predicted to be inactivated due to pLoF mutations. A full listing of all 1,317 genes knocked out, the number of knockout participants for each gene, and the specific pLoF mutation(s) are provided in Supplementary Table 1. 891 (67.7 %) of the genes were knocked out only in one participant (Fig. 1a). Nearly 1 in 5 sequenced participants (1,843 individuals, 17.5 %) had at least one gene knocked out by a homozygous pLoF mutation. 1,504 of these 1,843 individuals (81.6 %) were homozygous pLoF carriers for just one gene, but a minority of participants were knockouts for more than one gene and one participant had six genes with homozygous pLoF genotypes.

We compared the coefficient of inbreeding (F coefficient) in PROMIS participants with that of 15,249 individuals from outbred populations of European or African American ancestry. The F coefficient estimates the excess homozygosity compared with an outbred ancestor. PROMIS participants had a 4-fold higher median inbreeding coefficient compared to outbred populations (0.016 v 0.0041; P < 2 × 10−16) (Fig. 1b). Additionally, those in PROMIS who reported that their parents were closely related had even higher median inbreeding coefficients than those who did not (0.023 v 0.013; P < 2 × 10−16). The F inbreeding coefficient was correlated with the number of homozygous pLoF genes present in each individual. (Spearman r = 0.31; P = 5 × 10−231) (Fig. 1c). When restricted to individuals with high levels of inbreeding (F inbreeding coefficient > 6.25%, the expected degree of autozygosity from a first-cousin union), 721 of 1,585 individuals (45%) were homozygous for at least one pLoF mutation.

We compared our results to three recent reports where homozygous pLoF genes have been catalogued: in Pakistanis living in Britain,6 in Icelanders,7 and in the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC).8 In the PROMIS study, we identify a total of 734 unique genes in the homozygous pLoF state that were not observed in the other three studies (Extended Data Fig. 2). Intersection of the four sets of genes from these studies revealed only 25 common to all four studies.

In order to understand the phenotypic consequences of complete disruption of the 1,317 pLoF genes identified in the PROMIS study, we applied three approaches. First, for 426 genes where two or more participants were homozygous pLoF, we conducted an association screen against 201 distinct phenotypes (Supplementary Table 2). Second, in blood samples from each of 84 participants, we measured 1,310 protein biomarkers using a new, multiplexed, aptamer-based proteomics assay. Third, at a single gene, apolipoprotein C-III (encoded by APOC3), we recalled participants based on genotype and performed provocative physiologic testing.

In an association screen of knockout genes with phenotypes, the quantile-quantile plot of expected versus observed association results shows an excess of highly significant results without systematic inflation (Extended Data Fig. 3). Association results surpassed the Bonferroni significance threshold (P = 3 × 10−6, see Methods) for 26 gene-trait pairs (Supplementary Table 3). Below, we highlight seven results: PLA2G7, CYP2F1, TREH, A3GALT2, NRG4, SLC9A3R1, and APOC3.

Lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 (Lp-PLA2, encoded by PLA2G7) hydrolyzes phospholipids to generate lysophosphatidylcholine and oxidized nonesterified fatty acids. In observational epidemiologic studies, higher soluble Lp-PLA2 enzymatic activity has been correlated with increased risk for coronary heart disease; small molecule inhibitors of Lp-PLA2 have been developed for the treatment of coronary heart disease.9 In PROMIS, we identified participants who are naturally deficient in the Lp-PLA2 enzyme. Two participants are homozygous for a splice-site mutation, PLA2G7 c.663+1G>A, and 106 are heterozygous for this same mutation. We observed a dose-dependent response relationship between genotype and enzymatic activity: when compared with non-carriers, c.663+1G>A homozygotes have markedly lower Lp-PLA2 enzymatic activity (−245 nmol/ml/min, P = 2 × 10−7) whereas the 106 heterozygotes had an intermediate effect (−120 nmol/ml/min, P = 2 × 10−77) (Fig. 2a–b). If Lp-PLA2 plays a causal role for coronary heart disease, one might expect those naturally deficient for this enzyme to have reduced risk for coronary heart disease. We tested the association of PLA2G7 c.663+1G>A with myocardial infarction across all participants and found that carriers of the pLoF allele did not have reduced risk (OR 0.97; 95% CI, 0.70 – 1.34; P = 0.87) (Fig. 2c).10,11 In contrast, at two positive control genes, we replicated prior observations (Supplementary Table 4); at LDLR, heterozygous pLoF mutations increased MI risk 20-fold and, at PCSK9, heterozygous pLoF mutations reduced risk by 78%. Of note, in two recent randomized controlled trials, pharmacologic Lp-PLA2 inhibition failed to reduce risk for coronary heart disease,12,13 a result that might have been anticipated by this genetic analysis.

Cytochrome P450 2F1 (encoded by CYP2F1) is primarily expressed in the lung and metabolizes pulmonary-selective toxins, such as cigarette smoke, and thus, modulates the expression of environment-associated pulmonary diseases.14 At CYP2F1, we identified two participants homozygous for a splice-site mutation, c.1295-2A>G. When compared with non-carriers, c.1295-2A>G homozygotes displayed higher soluble interleukin 8 concentrations (3.7-fold increase, P = 2 × 10−6) (Extended Data Fig. 4). CYP2F1 c.1295-2A>G heterozygosity had a more modest effect (2.4-fold increase, P = 2 × 10−4). Interleukin 8 induces migration of neutrophils in airways and is a mediator of acute pulmonary inflammation and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).15 However, neither carrier reports a personal or family history of obstructive pulmonary disease; further studies of these participants are required to assess the roles of CYP2F1 and interleukin 8 on pulmonary physiology.

Trehalase (encoded by TREH) is an intestinal enzyme that splits the naturally-found unabsorbed disaccharide, trehalose, into two glucose molecules.16 Trehalase deficiency, an autosomal recessive trait, leads to abdominal pain, distention, and flatulence after trehalose ingestion. We identified six participants homozygous for a deletion of a splice acceptor site (c.90-9_106delTCTCTGCAGTGAGATTTACTGCCACG) in exon 2. Homozygotes, unlike heterozygotes or non-carriers, had lower concentrations of several apolipoprotein B-containing lipoprotein subfractions (Supplementary Table 3) (Extended Data Fig. 5).

Alpha-1,3-galactosyltransferase 2 (encoded by A3GALT2) catalyzes the formation of the Gal-α1-3Galβ1-4GlcNAc-R (α-gal) epitope; the biological role of this enzyme in humans is uncertain.17 At A3GALT2, we identified two participants homozygous for a frameshift mutation, p.Thr106SerfsTer4. Compared with non-carriers, p.Thr106SerfsTer4 homozygotes both had dramatically reduced concentrations of fasting C-peptide (−97.4%; P = 6 × 10−12) and insulin (−92.3%; P = 1 × 10−4). Such an association was only observed in the homozygous state (Extended Data Fig. 6). A3galt2−/− mice and pigs have recently been shown to have glucose intolerance.18,19

To understand if the identification of only a single homozygote may still be informative, we performed a complementary analysis, focusing on those with the most extreme standard Z scores (|Z score| > 5) and requiring that there be evidence for association in heterozygotes as well (see Methods). This procedure highlighted neureglin 4 (NRG4), a member of the epidermal growth factor family extracellular ligands which is highly expressed in brown fat, particularly during adipocyte differentiation.20,21 At NRG4, we identified a single participant homozygous for a frameshift mutation, p.Ile75AsnfsTer23, who had nearly absent fasting insulin C-peptide concentrations (−99.3 %; P = 1 × 10−10). When compared with non-carriers, heterozygotes for NRG4 p.Ile75AsnfsTer23 (n = 8) displayed 48.3 % reduction in insulin C-peptide (P = 1 × 10−2). Mice deleted for Nrg4 have recently been shown to have glucose intolerance.21 The single NRG4 pLoF homozygote participant did not have diabetes nor elevated fasting glucose. Heterozygosity for a NRG4 pLoF mutation (n=26) was also not associated with diabetes or fasting glucose. More detailed phenotyping will be required to definitively assess any relationship of NRG4 deficiency in humans with glucose intolerance.

To further dissect the consequences of a subset of homozygous pLoF genes, we measured 1,310 protein biomarkers in 84 participants through a new, multiplexed, proteomic assay (SOMAscan). Among the 84 participants, there were nine genes with at least two pLoF homozygotes and we associated these genotypes across 1,310 protein biomarkers and observed a number of associations (Supplementary Table 5). We highlight two PROMIS participants who are homozygous pLoF at SLC9A3R1; these participants have increased circulating concentrations of several proteins involved in parathyroid hormone or osteoclast signaling including calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CAMK2) alpha, beta, and delta subunits, cAMP-regulated phosphoprotein 19, and signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 1, 3, and 6 (Supplementary Table 5). SLC9A3R1 (aka NHERF1) encodes a Na+/H+ exchanger regulatory cofactor that interacts with and regulates the parathyroid hormone receptor; Nherf1−/− mice display hyperphosphaturia and disrupted protein kinase A-dependent cAMP-mediated phosphorylation.22 Humans carrying rare missense mutations in SLC9A3R1 have nephrolithiasis, osteoporosis, and hypophosphatemia.23

Apolipoprotein C-III (apoC-III, encoded by APOC3) is a major protein component of chylomicrons, very low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol.24 We and others recently reported that APOC3 pLoF mutations in heterozygous form lower plasma triglycerides and reduce risk for coronary heart disease4,5,25; there is now substantial interest in APOC3 as a therapeutic target.26–28 In published studies, no APOC3 pLoF homozygotes have been identified despite study of nearly 200,000 participants from the U.S. and Europe, raising concerns that complete APOC3 deficiency may be harmful. However, in this study of ~10,000 Pakistanis, we identified four participants homozygous for APOC3 p.Arg19Ter. When compared with non-carriers, p.Arg19Ter homozygotes displayed near-absent plasma apoC-III protein (−88.9 %, P = 5 × 10−23), lower plasma triglyceride concentrations (−59.6 %, P = 7 × 10−4), higher high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol (+26.9 mg/dL, P = 3 × 10−8); and similar levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol (P = 0.14) (Fig. 3a–d).

ApoC-III functions as a brake on the clearance of dietary fat from the circulation and thus, the complete lack of this protein should promote handling of ingested fat. We re-contacted one homozygous pLoF proband, his wife, and 27 of his first-degree relatives for genotyping and physiologic investigation. We were surprised to find that the proband’s wife, a first cousin, was also a pLoF homozygote, leading to all nine children being obligate homozygotes (Fig. 3e). In this family, we challenged pLoF homozygotes (APOC3−/−; n = 6) and non-carriers (APOC3+/+; n = 7) with a 50 g/m2 oral fat load followed by serial blood testing for six hours. APOC3 p.Arg19Ter homozygotes had significantly lower post-prandial triglyceride excursions (triglycerides area under the curve 468.3 mg/dL*6 hours vs 1267.7 mg/dL*6 hours; P = 1 × 10−4) (Fig. 3f). These data show that complete lack of apoC-III markedly improves clearance of plasma triglycerides after a fatty meal and are consistent with and extend an earlier report of diminished post-prandial lipemia in APOC3 pLoF heterozygotes.25

Targeted gene disruption in model organisms followed by phenotypic analysis has been a fruitful approach to understand gene function29; here, we extend this concept to the human organism, leveraging naturally-occurring pLoF mutations, consanguinity, and biochemical phenotyping. These results permit several conclusions. First, power to identify human knockouts is improved with the study of multiple populations and particularly those with high degrees of consanguinity. Using the observed median inbreeding coefficient of sequenced participants and genotypes from the first 7,078 sequenced Pakistanis, we estimate that the sequencing of 200,000 Pakistanis, may result in up to 8,754 genes (95% CI, 8,669–8,834) completely knocked out in at least one participant (Fig. 4). Second, a panel of phenotypes measured in a blood sample can yield hypotheses regarding phenotypic consequences of gene disruption as observed for PLA2G7, CYP2F1, TREH, A3GALT2, NRG4, SLC9A3R1, and APOC3. Finally, recall by genotype followed by provocative testing may provide physiologic insights. We used this approach to demonstrate that complete lack of apoC-III is tolerated and results in both lowered fasting triglyceride concentrations as well as substantially blunted post-prandial lipemia.

Several limitations deserve mention. First and most importantly, any given mutation annotated as pLoF may not truly lead to loss of protein function. To address this issue, in addition to bioinformatics filtration, we performed manual curation on all homozygous pLoF variants (n=1,580) (Supplementary Table 1 and Supplementary Table 6). Of note, such manual curation was not described in earlier reports.6,7,8 We found 56 variants with genotypes with a low number of supportive reads, 55 with poorly mapped reads (Supplementary Table 7), and an additional 66 where there were potential mechanisms of protein-truncation rescue (Extended Data Fig. 7) or occurred within exons or splice sites where conservation was low. Thus, we found the majority of pLoF calls (1403 out of 1580; 89%) to be free of mapping or annotation error. However, for any given pLoF, experimental validation will be required to prove loss of gene function (e.g., targeted assays such as RT-PCR of transcript and/or Western blot of protein to confirm its absence in the relevant tissue).

A second limitation is reduced statistical power for genotype-phenotype correlation if a gene is knocked-out in only 1 or 2 participants. However, this situation should improve with larger sample sizes (Extended Data Fig. 8). Finally, our analysis was limited to available phenotypes and in only one instance did we recall participants for deeper phenotyping; rather, a standardized clinical phenotyping protocol is desirable for each participant where a gene is observed to be knocked out.

These observations set the stage for a ‘human knockout project,’ a systematic effort to understand the phenotypic consequences of complete disruption of every gene in the human genome. Key elements for a human knockout project include: 1) identification of populations where homozygous genotypes may be enriched6,30; 2) deep-coverage sequencing of the protein-coding regions of the genome7; 3) availability of a broad array biochemical as well as clinical phenotypes across the population; 4) ability to re-contact knockout humans as well as family members; 5) a thorough clinical evaluation in each participant where a gene is observed to be knocked out; and 6) hypothesis-driven provocative phenotyping in selected participants.

Methods

General overview of the Pakistan Risk for Myocardial Infarction Study (PROMIS)

The PROMIS study was designed to investigate determinants of cardiometabolic diseases in Pakistan. Since 2005, the study has enrolled close to 38,000 participants; the present investigation sequenced 10,503 participants selected as 4,793 cases with myocardial infarction and 5,710 controls free of myocardial infarction. Participants aged 30–80 years were enrolled from nine recruitment centers based in five major urban cities in Pakistan. Type 2 diabetes in the study was defined based on self-report or fasting glucose levels >125 mg/dL or HbA1c > 6.5 % or use of glucose lowering medications. The institutional review board at the Center for Non-Communicable Diseases (IRB: 00007048, IORG0005843, FWAS00014490) approved the study and all participants gave informed consent.

Phenotype descriptions

Non-fasting blood samples (with the time since last meal recorded) were drawn and centrifuged within 45 minutes of venipuncture. Serum, plasma and whole blood samples were stored at −70°C within 45 minutes of venipuncture. All samples were transported on dry ice to the central laboratory at the Center for Non-Communicable Diseases (CNCD), Pakistan, where serum and plasma samples were aliquoted across 10 different storage vials. Samples were stored at −70°C for any subsequent laboratory analyses. All biochemical assays were conducted in automated auto-analyzers. At CNCD Pakistan, measurements for total-cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, triglycerides, and creatinine were made in serum samples using enzymatic assays; whereas levels of HbA1c were measured using a turbidemetric assay in whole-blood samples (Roche Diagnostics, USA). For further measurements, aliquots of serum and plasma samples were transported on dry ice to the Smilow Research Center, University of Pennsylvania, USA, where following biochemical assays were conducted: apolipoproteins (apoA-I, apoA-II, apoB, apoC-III, apoE) and non-esterified fatty acids were measured through immunoturbidometric assays using kits by Roche Diagnostics or Kamiya; lipoprotein (a) levels were determined through a turbidimetric assay using reagents and calibrators from Denka Seiken (Niigata, Japan); LpPLA2 mass and activity levels were determined using immunoassays manufactured by diaDexus (San Francisco, CA, USA); measurements for insulin, leptin and adiponectin were made using radio-immunoassays by LINCO (MO, USA); levels of adhesion molecules (ICAM-1, VCAM-1, P- and E-Selectin) were determined through enzymatic assays by R&D (Minneapolis, MN, USA); and measurements for C-reactive protein, alanine transaminase, aspartate transaminase, cystatin-C, ferritin, ceruloplasmin, thyroid stimulating hormone, alkaline phosphatase, sodium, potassium, choloride, phosphate, sex-harmone binding globulin were made using enzymatic assays manufactured by Abbott Diagnostics (NJ, USA). Glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was estimated from serum creatinine levels using the MDRD equation. ApoC-III levels were determined in an autoanalyzer using a commercially available ELISA by Sekisui Diagnostics (Lexington, USA). We also measured the following 52 protein biomarkers by multiplex immunoassay using a customised panel on the Luminex 100/200 instrument by RBM (Myriad Rules Based Medicine, Austin, TX, USA): fatty acid binding protein, granuloctye monocyte colony stimulating factor, granulocyte colony stimulating factor, interferon gamma, interleukin-1 beta, interleukin 1 receptor, interleukin 2, interleukin 3, interleukin 4, interleukin 5, interleukin 6, interleukin 7, interleukin 8, interleukin 10, interleukin 18, interleukin p40, interleukin p70, interleukin 15, interleukin 17, interleukin 23, macrophage inflammatory protein 1 alpha, macrophage inflammatory protein 1 beta, malondialdehyde-modified LDL, matrix metalloproteinase 2, matrix metalloproteinase 3, matrix metalloproteinase 9, nerve growth factor beta, tumor necrosis factor alpha, tumor necrosis factor beta, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, CD40, CD40 ligand, eotaxin, factor VII, insulin-like growth factor 1, lecithin-type oxidized LDL receptor 1, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1, myeloperoxidase, N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide, neuronal cell adhesion molecule, pregnancy-associated plasma protein A, soluble receptor for advanced glycation end-products, sortilin, stem cell factor, stromal cell-derived factor 1, thrombomodulin, S100 calcium binding protein B, and vascular endothelial growth factor.

Laboratory methods for array-based genotyping

As previously described, a genomewide association scan was performed using the Illumina 660 Quad array at the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute (Hinxton, UK) and using the Illumina HumanOmniExpress at Cambridge Genome Services, UK.31 Initial quality control (QC) criteria included removal of participants or single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that had a missing rate >5%. SNPs with a MAF <1% and a P-value of <10−7 for the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium test were also excluded from the analyses. In PROMIS, further QC included removal of participants with discrepancy between their reported sex and genetic sex determined from the X chromosome. To identify sample duplications, unintentional use of related samples (cryptic relatedness) and sample contamination (individuals who seem to be related to nearly everyone in the sample), identity-by-descent (IBD) analyses were conducted in PLINK.32

Laboratory methods for exome sequencing

Exome sequencing

Exome sequencing was performed at the Broad Institute. Sequencing and exome capture methods have been previously described.33,34 A brief description of the methods is provided below.

Receipt/quality control of sample DNA

Samples were shipped to the Biological Samples Platform laboratory at the Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard (Cambridge, MA, USA). DNA concentration was determined by PicoGreen (Invitrogen; Carlsbad, CA, USA) prior to storage in 2D-barcoded 0.75 ml Matrix tubes at −20 °C in the SmaRTStore (RTS, Manchester, UK) automated sample handling system. Initial quality control (QC) on all samples involving sample quantification (PicoGreen), confirmation of high- molecular weight DNA and fingerprint genotyping and gender determination (Illumina iSelect; Illumina; San Diego, CA, USA). Samples were excluded if the total mass, concentration, integrity of DNA or quality of preliminary genotyping data was too low.

Library construction

Library construction was performed as previously described35, with the following modifications: initial genomic DNA input into shearing was reduced from 3μg to 10–100ng in 50μL of solution. For adapter ligation, Illumina paired end adapters were replaced with palindromic forked adapters, purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies, with unique 8 base molecular barcode sequences included in the adapter sequence to facilitate downstream pooling. With the exception of the palindromic forked adapters, the reagents used for end repair, A-base addition, adapter ligation, and library enrichment PCR were purchased from KAPA Biosciences (Wilmington, MA, USA) in 96-reaction kits. In addition, during the post-enrichment SPRI cleanup, elution volume was reduced to 20 μL to maximize library concentration, and a vortexing step was added to maximize the amount of template eluted.

In-solution hybrid selection

1,970 samples underwent in-solution hybrid selection as previously described35, with the following exception: prior to hybridization, two normalized libraries were pooled together, yielding the same total volume and concentration specified in the publication. 8,808 samples underwent hybridization and capture using the relevant components of Illumina’s Rapid Capture Exome Kit and following the manufacturer’s suggested protocol, with the following exceptions: first, all libraries within a library construction plate were pooled prior to hybridization, and second, the Midi plate from Illumina’s Rapid Capture Exome Kit was replaced with a skirted PCR plate to facilitate automation. All hybridization and capture steps were automated on the Agilent Bravo liquid handling system.

Preparation of libraries for cluster amplification and sequencing

Following post-capture enrichment, libraries were quantified using quantitative PCR (KAPA Biosystems) with probes specific to the ends of the adapters. This assay was automated using Agilent’s Bravo liquid handling platform. Based on qPCR quantification, libraries were normalized to 2nM and pooled by equal volume using the Hamilton Starlet. Pools were then denatured using 0.1 N NaOH. Finally, denatured samples were diluted into strip tubes using the Hamilton Starlet.

Cluster amplification and sequencing

Cluster amplification of denatured templates was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Illumina) using HiSeq v3 cluster chemistry and HiSeq 2000 or 2500 flowcells. Flowcells were sequenced on HiSeq 2000 or 2500 using v3 Sequencing-by-Synthesis chemistry, then analyzed using RTA v.1.12.4.2. Each pool of whole exome libraries was run on paired 76bp runs, with and 8 base index sequencing read was performed to read molecular indices, across the number of lanes needed to meet coverage for all libraries in the pool.

Read mapping and variant discovery

Samples were processed from real-time base-calls (RTA v.1.12.4.2 software [Bustard], converted to qseq.txt files, and aligned to a human reference (hg19) using Burrows–Wheeler Aligner (BWA).36 Aligned reads duplicating the start position of another read were flagged as duplicates and not analysed. Data was processed using the Genome Analysis ToolKit (GATK v3).37–39 Reads were locally realigned around insertions-deletions (indels) and their base qualities were recalibrated. Variant calling was performed on both exomes and flanking 50 base pairs of intronic sequence across all samples using the HaplotypeCaller (HC) tool from the GATK to generate a gVCF. Joint genotyping was subsequently performed and ‘raw’ variant data for each sample was formatted (variant call format (VCF)). Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNVs) and indel sites were initially filtered after variant calibration marked sites of low quality that were likely false positives.

Data analysis QC

Fingerprint concordance between sequence data and fingerprint genotypes was evaluated. Variant calls were evaluated on both bulk and per- sample properties: novel and known variant counts, transition–transversion (TS–TV) ratio, heterozygous–homozygous non-reference ratio, and deletion/insertion ratio. Both bulk and sample metrics were compared to historical values for exome sequencing projects at the Broad Institute. No significant deviation of from historical values was noted.

Data processing and quality control of exome sequencing

Variant annotation

Variants were annotated using Variant Effect Predictor40 and the LOFTEE41 plugin to identify protein-truncating variants predicted to disrupt the respective gene’s function with “high confidence.” Each allele at polyallelic sites was separately annotated.

Sample level quality control

We performed quality control of samples using the following steps. For quality control of samples, we used bi-allelic SNVs that passed the GATK VQSR filter and were on genomic regions targeted by both ICE and Agilent exome captures. We removed samples with discordance rate > 10% between genotypes from exome sequencing with genotypes from array-based genotyping and samples with sex mismatch between inbreeding coefficient on chromosome X and fingerprinting. We tested for sample contamination using the verifyBamID software, which examines the proportion of non-reference bases at reference sites, and excluded samples with high estimated contamination (FREEMIX scores > 0.2).42 After removing monozygotic twins or duplicate samples using the KING software43, we removed outlier samples with too many or too few SNVs (>17,000 or <12,000 total variants; >400 singletons; and >300 doubletons). We removed those with extreme overall transition-to-transversion ratios (>3.8 or <3.3) and heterozygosity (heterozygote:non-reference homozygote ratio >6 or <2). Finally, we removed samples with high missingness (>0.05).

Variant level quality control

Variant score quality recalibration was performed separately for SNVs and indels use the GATK VariantRecalibrator and ApplyRecalibration to filter out variants with lower accuracy scores. Additionally, we removed sites with an excess of heterozygosity calls (InbreedingCoeff <−0.3). To further reduce the rate of inaccurate variant calls, we further filtered out SNVs with low average quality (quality per depth of coverage (QD) < 2) and a high degree of missingness (> 20 %), and indels also with low average quality (quality per depth of coverage (QD) < 3) and a high degree of missingness (> 20 %).

Laboratory methods for proteomics

Protein capture

For 91 participants, enriched for homozygous pLoF mutations, we measured 1,310 protein analytes in plasma using the SOMAscan assay (SomaLogic, Boulder, CO, USA). Protein-capture was performed using modified aptamer technology as previously described.44 Briefly, modified nucleotides, analogous to antibodies, on a custom DNA microarray recognize intact tertiary protein structures. After washing, complexes are released from beads by photocleavage of the linker with UV light and the resultant relative fluorescent unit is proportional to target protein.

Quality control

Samples (n = 7) were excluded if they showed evidence of systematic inflation of association, or >5 % of traits in the top or bottom 1st percentile of the analytic distribution.

Methods for manual curation of a subset of pLoF variants

Manual curation was performed collaboratively by three geneticists: 25 pLoF variant calls were reviewed independently by two reviewers and compared to ensure similar review criteria before the remainder was divided and separately assessed by each of the two reviewers separately. A third reviewer resolved discrepancies. Read and genotype support was confirmed by review of reads in Integrative Genomics Viewer. We flagged pLoF variants for any of the following six reasons: 1) read-mapping flags; 2) genotyping flags; 3) presence of an additional polymorphism which rescues protein truncation; 4) presence of an additional polymorphism which rescues splice site; 5) if affecting a minority of transcripts; and 6) polymorphism occurs at exon or splice site with low conservation. Criteria for these reasons are provided in Supplementary Table 6.

Methods for inbreeding analyses

Array-derived runs of homozygosity

Analyses were conducted in PLINK32 using genome-wide association (GWAS) data in PROMIS and HapMap 3 populations. Segments of the genome that were at-least 1.5 Mb long, had a SNP density of 1 SNP per 20 kb and had 25 consecutive homozygous SNPs (1 heterozygous and/or 5 missing SNPs were permitted within a segment) were defined to be in a homozygous state (or referred as “runs of homozygosity” (ROH)), as described previously.45 Homozygosity was expressed as the percentage of the autosomal genome found in a homozygous state, and was calculated by dividing the sum of ROH length within each individual by the total length of the autosome in PROMIS and HapMap 3 populations respectively. To investigate variability in homozygosity explained by parental consanguinity, the difference in R2 is reported for a linear regression model of homozygosity including and excluding parental consanguinity on top of age, sex and the first 10 principal components derived from the typed autosomal GWAS data.

In PROMIS, 39.0% of participants reported that their parents were cousins and 39.8% reported themselves being married to a cousin. An expectation from consanguinity is long regions of autozygosity, defined as homozygous loci identical by descent.46 Using genome-wide genotyping data available in 18,541 PROMIS participants, we quantified the length of runs of homozygosity, defined as homozygous segments at least 1.5 megabases long. We compared the lengths of runs of homozygosity among PROMIS participants with those seen in other populations from the International HapMap3 Project. Median length of genome-wide homozygosity among PROMIS participants was 6–7 times higher than participants of European (CEU, TSI) (P = 3.6 × 10−37), East Asian (CHB, JPT, CHD) (P = 5.4 × 10−48) and African ancestries (YRI, MKK) (P = 1.3 × 10−40), respectively (Extended Data Fig. 9).

Sequencing-derived coefficient of inbreeding

We compared the coefficient of inbreeding distributions of 10,503 exome sequenced PROMIS participants with 15,248 participants (European ancestry = 12,849, and African ancestry = 2,399) who were exome sequenced at the Broad Institute (Cambridge, MA) from the Myocardial Infarction Genetics consortium.34 We extracted approximately 5,000 high-quality polymorphic SNVs in linkage equilibrium present on both target intervals that passed variant quality control metrics based on HapMap 3 data.47 Using PLINK, we estimated the coefficient of inbreeding separately within each ethnicity group.32 The coefficient of inbreeding was estimated as the observed degree of homozygosity compared with the anticipated homozygosity derived from an estimated common ancestor.48 The Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test was used to test whether PROMIS participants had different median coefficients of inbreeding compared to other similarly sequenced outbred individuals and whether the median coefficient of inbreeding was different between PROMIS participants who reported parental relatedness versus not. A two-sided P of 0.05 was the pre-specified threshold for statistical significance.

Methods for sequencing projection analysis

To compare the burden of unique completely inactivated genes in the PROMIS cohort with outbred cohorts of diverse ethnicities, we extracted the minor allele frequencies (maf) of “high confidence” loss-of-function mutations observed in the first 7,078 sequenced PROMIS participants, and in European, African, and East Asian ancestry participants from the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC r0.3; exac.broadinstitute.org). For each gene and for each ethnicity, the combined minor allele frequency (cmaf) of rare (maf < 0.1%) “high confidence” loss-of-function mutations was calculated. We then simulated the number of unique completely inactivated genes across a range of sample sizes per ethnicity and PROMIS. The expected probability of observing complete inactivation (two pLoF copies in an individual) of a gene was calculated as   , which accounts for allozygous and autozygous, respectively, mechanisms for complete genie knockout. F, the inbreeding coefficient, is defined as   . For PROMIS, the median F inbreeding coefficient (0.016) was used for estimation. Down-sampling within the observed sample size for both high-confidence pLoF mutations and synonymous variants did not deviate significantly from the expected trajectory (Extended Data Fig. 10). For a range of sample sizes (0–200,000), each gene was randomly sampled under a binomial distribution (  ) and it was determined if the gene was successfully sampled at least once. To refine the estimated count of unique genes per sample size, each sampling was replicated ten times.

Methods for constraint score analysis

We sought to determine whether the observed homozygous pLoF genes were under less evolutionary constraint by first obtaining constraint loss of function constraint scores derived from the Exome Aggregation Consortium (Lek M et al, in preparation).49,50 Briefly, we used the number of observed and expected rare (MAF < 0.1%) loss of function variants per gene to determine to which of three classes it was likely to belong: pLoF (observed variation matches expectation), recessive (observed variation is ~50% expectation), or haploinsufficient (observed variation is <10% of expectation). The probability of being loss of function intolerant (pLI) of each transcript was defined as the probability of that transcript falling into the haploinsufficient category. Transcripts with a pLI ≥ 0.9 are considered very likely to be loss of function intolerant; those with pLI ≤ 0.1 are not likely to be loss of function intolerant. A list of 1,317 genes were randomly sampled from a list of sequenced genes 1,000 times and the proportion of loss of function intolerant genes compared to the proportion of the observed homozygous pLoF genes was compared using the chi square test. The likelihood that the distribution of the test statistics deviated from the pLoF was ascertained.

Additionally, we sought to determine whether there were genes with appreciable pLoF allele frequencies yet relative depletion of homozygous pLoF genotypes. We computed estimated genotype frequencies based on Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and the F inbreeding coefficient and compared the frequencies to the observed genotype counts with the chi square goodness-of-fit test. A nominal P < 0.05 is used to demonstrate at least nominal association.

The observed 1,317 homozygous pLoF genes were less likely to be classified as highly constrained (odds ratio 0.14; 95% CI 0.12, 0.16; P < 1 × 10−10). Additionally, the 1,317 homozygous pLoF genes are substantially depleted of genes described to be essential for survival and proliferation in four human cancer cell lines (12 of 870 essential genes observed, 1.4%).51

A number of genes previously predicted to be required for viability in humans were observed in the homozygous pLoF state in humans (Supplementary Table 8). For example, 40 of the 1,317 genes have been associated with embryonic or perinatal lethality as homozygous pLoF in mice.52 Furthermore, 56 genes predicted to be essential using mouse/human conservation data53 are tolerated as homozygous pLoF in Pakistani adults. In fact, 9 genes are in both datasets and are also modeled as LoF intolerant.50 One such gene, EP400 (also known as p400), influences cell cycle regulation via chromatin remodeling54 and is critical for maintaining the identity of murine embryonic stem cells55 but we observe an adult human homozygous for disruption of a canonical splice site (intron 3 of 52; c.1435+1G>A) in EP400. Conversely, we observed 90 genes where the heterozygous pLoF genotype is of appreciable frequency but the homozygous pLoF genotype is depleted (at P value threshold < 0.05) (Supplementary Table 9).

Methods for rare variant association analysis

Recessive model association discovery

We sought to determine whether complete loss-of-function of a gene was associated with a dense array of phenotypes. We extracted a list of individuals per gene who were homozygous for a high confidence pLoF allele that was rare (minor allele frequency < 1 %) in the cohort. From a list of 1,317 genes where there was at least one participant homozygous pLoF and a list of 201 traits, we initially considered 264,717 gene-trait pairings. To reduce the likelihood of false positives, we only considered gene-trait pairs where there were at least two homozygous pLoF alleles per gene phenotyped for a given trait yielding 18,959 gene-trait pairs for analysis. For all analyses, we constructed generalized linear models to test whether complete loss of function versus non-carriers was associated with trait variation. A logit link was used for binomial outcomes. Right-skewed continuous traits were natural log transformed. Age, sex, and myocardial infarction status were used as covariates in all analyses. We extracted principal components of ancestry using EIGENSTRAT to control for population stratification in all analyses.56 For lipoprotein-related traits, the use of lipid-lowering therapy was used as a covariate. For glycemic biomarkers, only non-diabetics were used in the analysis. The P threshold for statistical significance was 0.05/18,959 = 3 × 10−6.

Heterozygote association replication

We hypothesized that some of the associations for homozygous pLoF alleles will display a more modest effect for heterozygous pLoF alleles. Thus, the aforementioned analyses were performed comparing heterozygous pLoF carriers to non-carriers for the 26 homozygous pLoF-trait associations that surpassed prespecified statistical significance. A P of 0.05/26 = 0.002 was set for statistical significance for these restricted analyses.

Association for single genic homozygotes

We performed an exploratory analysis of gene-trait pairs where there was only one phenotyped homozygous pLoF. We performed the above association analyses for genes where there was only one homozygous pLoF phenotyped for a given trait and we focused on those with the most extreme standard Z score statistics (|Z score| > 5) from the primary association analysis and required that there to also be nominal evidence for association (P < 0.05) in heterozygotes as well to maximize confidence in an observed single homozygous pLoF-trait association.

Recessive model association discovery for proteomics

Among the 84 participants with proteomic analyses of 1,310 protein analytes, 9 genes were observed in the homozygous pLoF state at least twice. We log transformed each analyte and associated with homozygous pLoF genotype status, adjusting for proteomic plate, age, sex, myocardial infarction status, and principal components. Gene-analyte associations were considered significant if P values were less than 0.05/(1,310 × 9) = 4.3 × 10−6.

Methods for recruitment and phenotyping of an APOC3 p.Arg19Ter proband and relatives

Methods for Sanger sequencing

We collected blood samples from a total of 28 subjects, including one of the four APOC3 p.Arg19Ter homozygous participants along with 27 of his family and community members for DNA extraction and separated into plasma for lipid and apolipoprotein measurements. All subjects were consented prior to initiation of the studies (IRB: 00007048 at the Center for Non-Communicable Diseases, Paksitan). DNA was isolated from whole blood using a reference phenol-chloroform protocol.57 Genotypes for the p.Arg19Ter variant were determined in all 28 participants by Sanger sequencing. A 685 bp region of the APOC3 gene including the base position for this variant was amplified by PCR (Expand HF PCR Kit, Roche) using the following primer sequences: Forward primer CTCCTTCTGGCAGACCCAGCTAAGG, Reverse primer CCTAGGACTGCTCCGGGGAGAAAG. PCR products were purified with Exo-SAP-IT (Affymetrix) and sequenced via Sanger sequencing using the same primers.

Oral fat tolerance test

Six non-carriers and seven homozygotes also participated in an oral fat tolerance test. Participants fasted overnight and then blood was drawn for measurement of baseline fasted lipids. Following this, participants were administered an oral load of heavy cream (50 g fat per square meter of body surface area as calculated by the method of Mosteller58). Participants consumed this oral load within a time span of 20 minutes and afterwards consumed 200 mL of water. Blood was drawn at 2, 4, and 6 hours after oral fat consumption as done previously.59 All lipid and apolipoprotein measurements from these plasma samples were determined by immunoturbidimetric assays on an ACE Axcel Chemistry analyzer (Alfa Wasserman). A comparisons of area-under-the curve triglycerides was performed between APOC3 p.Arg19Ter homozygotes and non-carriers using a two independent sample Student’s t test; P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Extended Data

Supplementary Material

  

Extended Data Fig. 1

The site-frequency spectrum of synonymous, missense, and high-confidence pLoF mutations is represented. Points represent the proportion of variants within a 1 × 10−4 minor allele frequency bin for each variant category. Lines represent the cumulative proportions of variants categories. The bottom inset highlights that most pLoF variants are often seen in no more than one or two individuals. The top inset highlights that virtually all pLoF mutations are very rare.

Extended Data Fig. 2

We compared the counts and overlap of unique homozygous pLoF genes in PROMIS with other exome sequenced cohorts.

Extended Data Fig. 3

Analyses to determine whether homozygous pLoF carrier status was associated with traits was performed where there were at least two homozygous pLoF carriers phenotyped per trait. The observed versus the expected results from 15,263 associations are displayed here demonstrating an excess of associations beyond a Bonferroni threshold.

Extended Data Fig. 4

Participants who had pLoF mutations in the CYP2F1 gene had higher concentrations of interleukin-8 while heterozygotes had a more modest effect when compared to the rest of the cohort of non-carriers. Interleukin 8 concentration is natural log transformed.

Extended Data Fig. 5

Participants who had pLoF mutations in the TREH gene had lower concentrations of several lipoprotein subfractions.

Extended Data Fig. 6

Among nondiabetics, those who were homozygous pLoF for A3GALT2 had substantially lower fasting insulin C-peptide concentrations. This observation was not evident in nondiabetic heterozygous pLoF A3GALT2 participants. Insulin C-peptide is natural log transformed.

Extended Data Fig. 7

Short-reads aligning to genomic positions 65,339,112 to 65,339,132 on chromosome 1 are displayed for one individual with a putative homozygous pLoF genotype in this region. The single nucleotide polymorphism at position 65,339,122 from G to T is annotated as a nonsense mutation in the JAK1 gene. However, all three homozygotes of this mutation carried a tandem single nucleotide polymorphism in the same codon (A to G at 65,339,124) thus resulting in a glutamine and effectively rescuing the protein-truncating mutation.

Extended Data Fig. 8

We simulate the number of genes expected to be knocked out by minimum knockout count per gene at increasing sample sizes. We perform this simulation with and without the observed inbreeding.

Extended Data Fig. 9

Consanguinity leads to regions of genomic segments that are identical by descent and can be observed as runs of homozygosity. Using genome-wide array data in 17,744 PROMIS participants and reference samples from the International HapMap 3, the burden of runs of homozygosity (minimum 1.5 Mb) per individual was derived and population-specific distributions are displayed, with outliers removed. This highlights the higher median runs of homozygosity burden in PROMIS and the higher proportion of individuals with very high burdens.

Extended Data Fig. 10

We ran simulations to estimate the number of unique, completely knocked out genes at increasing sample sizes. Prior to applying our model, we first applied this approach to a range of sample sizes below 7,078 for variants that were not under constraint, synonymous variants ( ), and for high-confidence null variants ( ). At the observed sample size, we did not appreciate significant selection. We expect that at increasing sample sizes, there may be a subset of genes that will not be tolerated in a homozygous pLoF state. In fact, our estimates are slightly more conservative when comparing outbred simulations with a recent description of >100,000 Icelanders using a more liberal definition for pLoF mutations.

Fig 1

 , Most genes are observed in the homozygous pLoF state in only single individuals.   The distribution of F inbreeding coefficient of PROMIS participants is compared to those of outbred samples of African (AFR) and European (EUR) ancestry.  , The burden of homozygous pLoF genes per individual is correlated with coefficient of inbreeding.

Fig 2

  Carriage of a splice-site mutation, c.663+1G>A, in PLA2G7 leads to a dose-dependent reduction of both lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 (Lp-PLA2) mass (P = 6 × 10−5) and activity (P = 2 × 10−7), with homozygotes having no circulating Lp-PLA2.   Despite substantial reductions of Lp-PLA2 activity, PLA2G7 c.663+1G>A heterozygotes and homozygotes have similar coronary heart disease risk when compared with non-carriers (P = 0.87).

Fig 3

  APOC3 pLoF genotype status, apolipoprotein C-III, triglycerides, HDL cholesterol and LDL cholesterol distributions among all sequenced participants. Apolipoprotein C-III concentration is displayed on a logarithmic base 10 scale.   A proband with APOC3 pLoF homozygote genotype as well as several family members were recalled for provocative phenotyping. Surprisingly, the spouse of the proband was also a pLoF homozygote, leading to nine obligate homozygote children. Given the extensive number of first-degree unions, the pedigree is simplified for clarity.   APOC3 p.Arg19Ter homozygotes and non-carriers within the same family were challenged with a 50 g/m2 fat feeding. Homozygotes had lower baseline triglyceride concentrations and displayed marked blunting of post-prandial rise in plasma triglycerides.

Fig 4

Number of unique homozygous pLoF genes anticipated with increasing sample sizes sequenced in PROMIS compared with similar African (AFR) and European (EUR) sample sizes. Estimates derived using observed allele frequencies and degree of inbreeding.

