The immunology of stroke: from mechanisms to translation

Abstract

Immunity and inflammation are key elements of the pathobiology of stroke, a devastating illness second only to cardiac ischemia as a cause of death worldwide. While the immune system participates in the brain damage produced by ischemia, the damaged brain, in turn, exerts a powerful immunosuppressive effect that promotes fatal intercurrent infections and threatens the survival of stroke patients. Inflammatory signaling is instrumental in all stages of the ischemic cascade, from the early damaging events triggered by arterial occlusion, to the late regenerative processes underlying post-ischemic tissue repair. Recent developments have revealed that stroke, like multiple sclerosis, engages both innate and adaptive immunity. But, unlike multiple sclerosis, adaptive immunity triggered by newly exposed brain antigens does not have an impact on the acute phase of the damage. Nevertheless, modulation of adaptive immunity exerts a remarkable protective effect on the ischemic brain and offers the prospect of new stroke therapies. However, immunomodulation is not devoid of deleterious side effects, and gaining a better understanding of the reciprocal interaction between the immune system and the ischemic brain is essential to harness the full therapeutic potential of the immunology of stroke.

Introduction

Inflammation has long been know to affect the brain after stroke, and cells of the immune system, such as neutrophils and macrophages, have traditionally been used by neuropathologists and forensic pathologists to determine the approximate age of cerebrovascular lesions1. Commonly thought to merely be a reaction to tissue damage, inflammation has been increasingly recognized as a key contributor to the pathophysiology of cerebrovascular diseases, especially stroke caused by arterial occlusion or ischemic stroke2. Recent evidence suggests that elements of the immune system are intimately involved in all stages of ischemic cascade (Box 1), from the acute intravascular events triggered by the interruption of the blood supply, to the parenchymal processes leading to brain damage and to the ensuing tissue repair. In turn, the ischemic brain, through the autonomic nervous system, exerts a potent suppressive effect on lymphoid organs, which promotes intercurrent infections, a major determinant of stroke morbidity and mortality3,4. Therefore, the immune system is closely related to critical events determining the fate of the ischemic brain and the survival of stroke patients. Like in multiple sclerosis (MS), the classical inflammatory disease of the central nervous system (CNS), elements of innate and adaptive immunity are engaged in the post-ischemic brain5. Thus, molecular cues generated by cerebral ischemia activate components of innate immunity, promote inflammatory signaling and contribute to tissue damage. At the same time, these processes stimulate a potentially damaging adaptive immune response directed at antigens previously sequestered behind the blood-brain barrier (BBB). These recent developments warrant a re-evaluation of the contribution of inflammation and immunity to stroke pathophysiology. In this brief review, we will focus on the involvement of innate and adaptive immunity in ischemic brain injury and assess their impact on tissue damage and repair. Furthermore, we will examine the evidence for an adaptive cytotoxic response against newly exposed brain antigens and assess their role in the acute and chronic phase of the injury. Finally, we will evaluate the therapeutic opportunities afforded by modulation of the immune system and their potential pitfalls.

Inflammatory signaling in the early post-ischemic period

Post-ischemic inflammation is characterized by an orderly sequence of events involving the brain, its vessels, the circulating blood, and lymphoid organs. Inflammation is an integral part of the cascade of events triggered by ischemia and reperfusion (I/R) (Box 1). The inflammatory process begins in the intravascular compartment immediately after arterial occlusion, when the ensuing hypoxia, changes in shear stress, and production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) trigger the coagulation cascade, and lead to activation of complement, platelet and endothelial cells (EC)6–9(Fig. 1). Intravascular formation of fibrin, traps platelets and leukocytes leading to microvascular occlusions10,11. Within minutes after ischemia, the adhesion molecule P-selectin is translocated to the surface membrane of platelet and EC12, and proinflammatory signals are rapidly generated (Table 1). Oxidative stress in EC reduces the bioavailability of nitric oxide (NO), a potent vasodilator and an inhibitor of platelet aggregation and leukocyte adhesion12. Loss of the beneficial effects of NO exacerbates intravascular plugging and aggravates the ischemic insult by reducing blood flow to the ischemic territory13,14. Furthermore, oxidative stress leads to constriction of pericytes, contractile cells that replace myocytes in capillaries, producing microvascular occlusions15. Oxidative stress and inflammatory mediators also alter the permeability of the BBB. Pinocytotic vescicles increase in the cytoplasm of EC, enhancing trans-endothelial transport16. Proteases are expressed in vascular cells and released by leukocytes, whereas junctional proteins that seal adjacent EC are downregulated, facilitating extravasation of proteins and cells through the paracellular route (Fig. 1)16. In the perivascular space, I/R activates perivascular macrophages and mast cells. Mast cell degranulation releases vasoactive mediators (histamine), proteases, and TNF, while activated macrophages release proinflammatory cytokines17–20 (Box 2) (Fig. 1). These proinflammatory mediators contribute to the endothelial expression of adhesion molecules and to the BBB damage that promotes the infiltration of leukocytes (neutrophils, lymphocytes and monocytes)19.

Ischemic cell death activates innate immunity and sets the stage for adaptive immunity

As the ischemic cascade progresses (Box 1), cell death leads to a new phase of the inflammatory response (Fig. 2). Dying and dead cells release “danger signals” that activate the immune system21. Some of these signals, like the nucleotides ATP and UTP, are released by cells under stress when the cell membrane is still intact and set the stage for the subsequent immune response22.

ATP and neurotransmitters

Extracellular ATP increases within minutes after ischemia as a result of neuronal and glial depolarization or escape through damaged plasma membranes23–25. ATP is also released by vascular cells and blood cells, and may promote intravascular coagulation and platelet aggregation26. High parenchymal ATP levels activate P2×7 receptors in microglia leading to release of pro-inflammatory mediators (Fig. 2). Activated microglia develop many characteristics of macrophages including ameboid morphology, migratory capacity, phagocytosis and MHC class II-restricted antigen presentation (Box 3). At the same time, neurotransmitters release after I/R may counteract the emerging inflammatory response. Microglia express a wide variety of neurotransmitter receptors, including AMPA, kainate, adrenergic, GABA  opioid, and cannabinoid receptors27. With some exceptions27 (Fig. 1), activation of these receptors downregulates microglial cytokine, ROS and NO production27, and suppresses the secretory response in mast cells28,29. Therefore, ATP represents an early neuronal danger signal, promoting the inflammatory response of resident immune cells, whereas neurotransmitter release may oppose these changes and counteract inflammation.

Cell death and pattern recognition receptors in the post-ischemic brain

A different signaling landscape emerges after cells begin to die. A wide variety of molecular signals are released from the intracellular compartment or are generated by the action of lytic enzymes escaped from dead cells on matrix proteins (Fig. 2). These so-called danger associated molecular pattern molecules (DAMPs) activate pattern recognition receptors, including toll like receptors (TLRs) and scavenger receptors, widely expressed on microglia, perivascular macrophages, and brain EC30. DAMPs and purines act in concert to induce the expression of proinflammatory molecules in infiltrating leukocytes (Table 1) and to prime dendritic cells (DC) for antigen presentation (Boxes 2 and 3) (Fig. 2). Considering the high vascular density of the brain, inflammatory mediators released from parenchymal cells are likely to feed back on the vascular and perivascular compartments to reinforce and amplify the expression of cytokines, chemokines and adhesion molecules that drive the infiltration of blood borne cells into the ischemic tissue (see previous section). After neuronal death, loss of cell-cell interaction between neurons and microglia also promotes inflammatory signaling (Fig. 1). In the normal state, microglia are kept quiescent by contact with neurons. For example, CD200, a surface protein expressed in neurons, interacts with its receptor CD200R on microglia enforcing a resting phenotype31. Disruption of this interaction due to post-ischemic loss of CD20032 may promote microglial activation (Fig. 1). Similarly, CX3CL1 (fractalkine), a cell surface bound chemokine constitutively expressed by neurons, suppresses microglial activation through its microglial receptor CX3CR1. Thus, after neuronal injury loss of CX3CL1 results in enhanced microglial activation in several inflammatory disease models33. In addition, increasing concentrations of extracellular glutamate activate metabotropic glutamate receptors on microglia leading to a pro-inflammatory phenotype34 (Fig. 1). Therefore, as neuronal death develops in the ischemic core and spreads to the penumbra the loss of the immunosuppressive effect afforded by neurotransmitter release and neuron-microglia interaction may also foster post-ischemic inflammation.

Collectively, these observations suggest that the inflammatory response after I/R starts at the vascular level, driven by non-transcriptional events triggered by hypoxia, shear stress and ROS production. As ischemia damages the brain tissue, danger signals are released first from cells under stress and then from necrotic cells. Concomitant with the loss of immunosuppressive mechanisms, these signals activate purinergic receptors and pattern recognition receptors, which induce an inflammatory response in resident brain cells and infiltrating leukocytes.

Does a classical adaptive immune response contribute to ischemic brain injury?

Danger signals released from damaged cells also promote the presentation of tissue antigens that were previously hidden by the BBB or that develop as a result of the breakdown of cell membranes21 (Fig. 2). Antigen presentation leads to the development of cellular and humoral immunity directed against the antigens (Box 3). This adaptive immune response has the potential of inducing autoimmunity against the organ in which the cell death occurred, as described in the heart (Dressler’s syndrome), eye (sympathetic ophthalmia) and pancreas (diabetes)21. Furthermore, the damaging effect of adaptive immunity is well established in MS and in models of autoimmune demyelination5. The next section will review the evidence for a pathogenic role of adaptive immunity in stroke.

Stroke and adaptive immunity

Antibodies against CNS antigens develop after ischemic stroke, suggesting a humoral immune response to the injury, and circulating T cells become sensitized against CNS antigens, such as myelin basic protein (MBP) and related peptides (Table 2). APC are reduced in the periphery and increased in the ischemic brain both in rodent and human stroke35–38. The accumulation of APC coincides with the peak of lymphocytic infiltration and is associated with expression of MHC class II molecules and the co-stimulatory molecule CD8035,37,38, findings suggestive of antigen presentation (Box 3). Support for involvement of adaptive immunity also comes from studies on the role of lymphocytes in models of focal cerebral ischemia. Ischemia leads to infiltration of the major lymphocytes subtypes into the ischemic brain37 (Box 3). Increasing evidence suggests that lymphocytes contribute to ischemic injury (Table 2) (Fig. 3). Lymphocyte-deficient mice are protected from ischemic damage39,40. The protection has been attributed to T cells, because B-cell-deficient mice or lymphocyte-deficient mice reconstituted with B-cells are still protected from injury (Table 2). γδT cells also have been shown to contribute to the injury by releasing the proinflammatory cytokine IL-1741 (Fig. 3). In contrast, T  are protective in the late stage of cerebral ischemia, an effect evident only if the injury is small42,43. Additional evidence in favor of the involvement of cell-based adaptive mechanisms in stroke damage was provided by studies in which animals were tolerized against myelin-derived peptides (Table 2). Repeated mucosal administration of myelin antigens (tolerization) prior to arterial occlusion protects rodents from ischemic brain injury44. Although tolerization is antigen specific, its beneficial effects are not restricted to immune responses directed at the inducing antigen, but are more widespread, a phenomenon termed bystander suppression44. The protection can be induced in naïve mice by adoptive transfer of splenocytes or CD4+ T cells from tolerized animals45,46, suggesting the involvement of cellular immune mechanisms. Examination of T-cell function indicates that activation of tolerized T cells by the antigen unveiled by the stroke induces a Th  cytokine response (Box 3)45,47,48. The effect has been attributed to IL-4 and IL-10 production that favors the formation of TGFβ secreting T  cells45,46,48. Other studies have found that administration of recombinant T-cell receptor ligand (RTL), consisting of α1 and β1 domains of MHC class II complex bound to a myelin peptide antigen (MOG 35–55), reduces stroke volume in focal ischemia49. The protective effect is associated with reduction of infiltrating inflammatory cells and may result from suppression of autoreactive T cells targeted against myelin49. Although RTLs may not bind T cells, but APC and platelets50, the findings suggest a role of cellular immunity in the mechanisms of ischemic brain injury.

Despite the evidence supporting an autoimmune response against the post-ischemic brain, there are inconsistencies with the hypothesis that classical adaptive immunity contributes ischemic brain injury. The temporal profile of the involvement T cells in brain damage is not consistent with established concepts of adaptive immunity51 (Fig. 3). Thus, the protective effect observed in lymphocyte deficient mice or afforded by blocking postischemic trafficking of T cells into the ischemic brain occurs 24–48 hrs after ischemia40, whereas adaptive responses require an interval of 7–10 days from antigen presentation to the clonal expansion of autoreactive T cells and immune attack on the target organ51 (Box 3). Furthermore, reconstitution of lymphocyte deficient mice with T cells targeting non-CNS antigens worsens ischemic damage, and mice lacking co-stimulatory molecules essential for antigen-specific T-cell response are not protected from ischemia40. It is also surprising that unlike autoimmune responses in other organs, where there is a prevalence for either T-helper or T-effector cell participation, both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells are involved in ischemic injury52. Collectively, these observations argue against an autoimmune attack on the brain resulting from presentation of CNS antigen released by the stroke.

The lymphocyte puzzle

If lymphocytes do not mediate an autoimmune attack on the brain how do they contribute to the early phase of ischemic brain injury? One possibility is that these cells participate in the cerebrovascular dysfunction occurring after ischemia or have prothrombotic actions leading to microvascular occlusions52. These effects would be deleterious by preventing reperfusion and by compromising collateral flow after I/R. However, lack of lymphocytes does not improve post-ischemic cerebral blood flow at least in the acute phase53, nor does it suppress thrombus formation40. Therefore, effects of lymphocytes altering microvascular perfusion or patency seem unlikely. Another possibility is that NKT or γδT cells, T cells that have a simplified TCR and may not require antigen processing and MHC presentation, as well as NK cells (Box 3), are responsible for these early cytotoxic effects of lymphocytes. In support of this hypothesis, NKT cells are not present in Rag1−/− mice and SCID mice54 and they could contribute to explain the early neuroprotection observed in these models of lymphocyte deficiency39,40. However, CD1-deficient mice lack NKT cells and are not protected from ischemic injury at 24 hrs40, suggesting that NKT cells may not be involved in the early phase of the injury. γδT cells have been implicated in ischemic brain injury, but their involvement seems restricted to the late phase of cerebral ischemia (4 days)40,41. Considering the limited number of studies available, the involvement of NK, NKT and γδT cells, lymphocyte subtypes that act in a fashion akin to innate immunity, needs further exploration.

Collectively, these data suggest that, although an antigen specific immune response may develop following stroke, evidence that autoreactive T cells attack brain antigens exposed by ischemic damage against which they were sensitized is lacking. Lymphocytes do play a role in the development and progression of the injury, but the mechanism of their powerful effect does not conform to the tenets of classical autoimmunity. The role of NK, NKT and γδT cells, which could contribute to the acute phase of the injury, needs further exploration. Similarly, considering the evidence for humoral immune responses in stroke (Table 2), the contribution of B-cells to the damage needs a more in depth assessment.

Resolution of inflammation and tissue repair

Post-ischemic inflammation is a self-limiting process that eventually subsides and prepares the terrain for the structural and functional reorganization of the injured brain. The factors governing resolution of inflammation and the reestablishment of tissue homeostasis are still poorly understood, particularly in brain. Increasing evidence suggest that resolution of inflammation is not a passive process due to exhaustion of the signaling, but is orchestrated by the interplay of a large number of mediators which actively suppress the inflammatory response55. Major steps in process include removal of dead cells, development of an anti-inflammatory milieu, and generation of pro-survival factors fostering tissue reconstruction and repair55,56.

Clearing dead cells

Microglia and infiltrating macrophages constitute the predominant phagocytes removing dead cells and tissue debris after stroke57,58, a process orchestrated by “find me” and “eat me” signals. “Find-me signals”, including purines released from injured cells and chemokines, attract microglia and macrophages to the site of injury59,60 (Fig. 4). These phagocytic cells are then presented with “eat-me signals” associated with dying or dead cells (Fig. 4).

TGFβ, IL-10 and the anti-inflammatory milieu

TGFβ and IL-10 are pleiotropic immunoregulatory cytokines that play a crucial role in the development of the anti-inflammatory milieu associated with tissue repair (Fig. 4). The production of these cytokines is promoted by phagocytosis and occurs in concert with the removal of dead cells56. TGFβ is upregulated after ischemia primarily in microglia and macrophages and, in addition to its neuroprotective properties, has also profound effects on immune cells. Although well known for its proinflammatory effects, TGFβ can suppress inflammation by inhibiting Th1 and Th2 responses and promoting T  cell development61. Similarly, the immunoregulatory cytokine IL-10, produced by different cells including T  cells42, has both neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory activities (Fig. 4). Therefore, post-ischemic production of TGFβ and IL-10 can facilitate tissue repair by promoting the resolution of inflammation and exerting direct cytoprotective effects on surviving cells in the ischemic territory.

Growth factors

Post-ischemic production of growth factors helps to establish an environment that is favorable to neuronal sprouting, neurogenesis, angiogenesis, gliogenesis and matrix reorganization62–64. Inflammatory cells, as well as neurons and astrocytes65,66, are capable of producing a vast array of growth factors (Table 1). For example, microglia are required for the full expression of IGF-167, a critical factor in post-ischemic neuronal sprouting66, whereas reactive astrocytes are required for functional recovery after stroke68. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), a key growth factor in post-ischemic angiogenesis, is produced by reactive astrocytes69, and its action may require neutrophil MMPs, suggesting a link between inflammatory cells and angiogenesis70. However, VEGF administration early after ischemia or in excessive doses may enhance the damage71,72. The role that inflammatory signaling in brain recovery has also been highlighted by studies in which the transcriptome of sprouting neurons was defined indicating involvement of MHC I class molecules and complement subunits66.

The evidence presented above indicates that cells of the immune system serve a fundamental role in all the phases of post-ischemic brain recovery. But, the limited data available provide only a glimpse into the complex sequence of events that reestablish the structural and functional homeostasis of the brain after stroke. Additional investigations on recently identified mediators instrumental to inflammation resolution and tissue repair, such as lipoxins, resolvins, protectins, progranulins, and cyclopentenone prostaglandins (Table 1) (Fig. 4)55,56, are needed to fully elucidate the role of the immune system in brain repair after stroke.

Stroke and systemic immunity

Concomitant with the inflammatory response involving the brain, immunological changes are also observed in the blood, bone marrow, spleen and other lymphoid organs3,73. Genome profiling of peripheral blood in stroke patients has demonstrated characteristic patterns of inflammatory gene expression that can help determine the cause of ischemic stroke74, reflecting the specificity of the systemic inflammatory response to brain injury. In rodent models as in patients with ischemic stroke, white blood cell count and expression of cytokines and inflammatory markers are increased within hours after ischemia75–78. Such acute phase response is followed by a dramatic immunodepression, especially in patients with large strokes, characterized by lymphopenia, reduced functional activity of monocytes, upregulation of anti-inflammatory cytokines, lymphocyte apoptosis and splenic atrophy78,79. These immunological changes are associated with an increased tendency to respiratory and urinary tract infections, which are responsible for considerable morbidity and mortality in stroke patients3,4. Infections tend to occur in patients with larger stroke and with low CD4 lymphocyte counts and elevated levels of IL-10 and IL-6, reflecting immunodepression80. How these systemic immune changes are mediated is not completely understood, but there is evidence that sympathetic activation and the attendant release of stress steroids and catecholamines are involved3,4. Thus, cortisol and catecholamines are elevated in stroke patients most susceptible to infection81, and steroid antagonists and the β-adrenergic receptor antagonist propanolol counteract post-stroke lymphocyte apoptosis and infection propensity in rodent models82.

Bright and dark sides of post-stroke immunosuppression

What is the biological significance of post-stroke immunodepression? One possibility is that the lymphopenia and immunosuppression limit the development of autoreactive T cells targeted to CNS antigens and dampen a potential autoimmune attack on the brain3,4. As discussed in the previous section the relative rapidity of the development of ischemic brain injury is not consistent with the temporal profile of an adaptive response against the brain. However, it is conceivable that sensitization to CNS antigens plays role in the long-term outcome of the stroke (Fig. 3). About 30% of stroke survivors have dementia, often associated with brain atrophy83. The bases for the cerebral atrophy are not entirely clear, but immunological mechanisms triggered by the stroke cannot be discounted. Pathological studies have shown an inflammatory infiltrate that persists for years after the stroke. For example, mononuclear cells, perivascular cuffing and macrophages are present, respectively, in 42, 44, and 75% of brains with stroke in a large series1 and T cells and DC are observed in “old” strokes38. However, these focal inflammatory changes have not been linked to post-stroke immunosuppression or dementia, and their pathogenic significance remains uncertain.

On the other hand, post-stroke immunosuppression is deleterious in that it increases the incidence of infections, a major determinant of poor neurological outcome, morbidity and mortality3,4. Acute infection could also negatively affect stroke outcome by upregulating co-stimulatory molecules and promoting antigen presentation21. This possibility is supported by studies in which bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) administered at the time of reperfusion to simulate post-stroke infection, worsens the outcome of experimental stroke84 and increases post-ischemic brain atrophy assessed 1 month after stroke85,86. The effect is associated with increased expression of B7.1, a co-stimulatory molecule needed for efficient antigen presentation (Box 3), as well as T-cell sensitization against CNS antigens and a Th1 cytokine response85,86. Therefore, post-stroke immunosuppression is detrimental by increasing the incidence of systemic infections and, possibly, by promoting antigen presentation and autoimmunity against the brain, which may play a role in the long-term sequelae of the stroke. At the same time, immunosuppression could be beneficial by attenuating such delayed autoimmune response.

Bench to bedside: trials, tribulations and therapeutic opportunities

Ischemic stroke remains an enormous therapeutic challenge. Currently, thrombolysis with tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) is the only effective therapy, but due to the narrow therapeutic window of less than 4.5 hrs and safety concerns, fewer than 5% of stroke patients receive this treatment87. Among the potential therapeutic approaches targeting the ischemic cascade (Box 1), preclinical studied in rodent models suggest that suppression of inflammation offers unique advantages. First, these treatments have an extended therapeutic window and are effective when administered up to 12–24 hrs after stroke88,89. Therefore, they could be used in patients who fail the time window for thrombolysis. Second, because suppression of inflammation is also beneficial in models of cerebral hemorrhage90, concerns about worsening brain injury in patients in whom hemorrhagic stroke has not been excluded would be minimized and early treatment by emergency medical teams would become feasible. Finally, considering that the inflammation particularly deleterious in ischemia associated with reperfusion91,92, suppression of inflammation would be a fitting complement to reperfusion therapy using thrombolytics or intravascular clot removal. Although these considerations are based on animal models, which may not recapitulate in full the human disease (Box 1), inflammation is a critical pathogenic component of human stroke and remains an attractive target for therapeutic intervention.

Anti-inflammatory agents

Blocking antibodies directed against adhesion molecules (ICAM-1, MAC-1), or recombinant neutrophil inhibitory factor have not been effective in clinical trials93. In the case of the ICAM-1 trial, the negative outcome has been attributed to deleterious immunoactivation resulting from administration of a mouse antibody to humans, as reproduced in an experimental study in which murine antibodies to rat ICAM-1 were administered to rats94. Although there also might be other reasons for these failures93, a likely contributing factor is that post-ischemic inflammation acts through multiple redundant pathways that cannot be effectively suppressed by blocking a single cytokine or adhesion molecule, as attempted in these clinical trials. Thus, neutralizing upstream mediators of the signaling cascade or blocking multiple inflammatory pathways would be more effective (Table 3). For example, blocking upstream components of inflammatory signaling, such as complement, TLR or scavenger receptors is highly protective in experimental models (Supplemental Table 1). Furthermore, minocycline, an agent with multiple neuroprotective actions including broad anti-inflammatory properties, has shown promise in clinical trials95 (Table 3). Another strategy, described in the next section, is to develop approaches in which the immune system is directed to suppress the deleterious effects of inflammation while enhancing its protective potential.

Immunomodulation and T-cell based approaches

Ischemic tolerance provides an example of protective immunomodulation. Ischemic tolerance or preconditioning is a phenomenon in which a sub-lethal injurious stimulus protects an organ against a subsequent lethal stimulus. For example, a short non-damaging ischemic insult to the brain (local preconditioning) or other organs (remote preconditioning) protects the brain from a subsequent damaging ischemic insult2,96. Similarly, administration of low doses of LPS protects the brain from ischemic damage26. Although ischemic tolerance is well know to protect the brain by simultaneously suppressing multiple pathways in the ischemic cascade2, modulation of the post-ischemic immune response has emerged as one of its key effector mechanisms30,97. In the tolerance induced by LPS, post-ischemic TLR4 signaling is redirected towards production of IFNβ, which, in turn, reprograms the immune system to suppress the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and the infiltration of inflammatory cells98. On the other hand, NF-κB-dependent inflammatory mediators, such as IL-1, TNF, iNOS-derived NO and ROS, are also required for the full expression of the tolerance99–102, indicating that the protection does not rely just on the suppression of deleterious inflammatory mediators, but on a fine balance between pro- and anti-inflammatory signaling. One of the challenges, therefore, is to learn how to modulate the immune system to replicate the beneficial inflammatory milieu induced by preconditioning. Tolerization may provide the opportunity to achieve this goal. Induction of immune tolerance through mucosal exposure to myelin antigens or E-selectin promotes a protective Th  response, which acts through multiple pathways to suppress the deleterious effects of inflammation47. Due to the need to establish tolerization prior to injury, this approach, like preconditioning, would be more appropriate for stroke prevention in high-risk patients than acute stroke treatment. Another strategy is based on administration of RTL (Table 3). As discussed in the section on adaptive immunity, RTL suppresses the infiltration of inflammatory cells and provides neuroprotection even if administered after the onset of cerebral ischemia49. Similarly, administration of the immunomodulatory co-polymer Poly-YE ameliorates neurological function without reducing injury volume, an effect attributed to increased production of growth factors and hippocampal neurogenesis103. The full translational potential of treatments based on immunomodulation has not been established. For example, therapeutic window, efficacy in females and in aging, protection in the presence of cardiovascular risk factors and efficacy in higher order species need further exploration. Nevertheless, its powerful protective effects justify additional investigations in this direction.

The recent identification of IL-17 secreting T cells as a critical effector of the tissue damage in autoimmune diseases (Th17 cells)104 and cerebral ischemia (γδT cells)41 raises the possibility that counteracting IL-17 could be beneficial in cerebral ischemia as in experimental allergic encephalomyelitis104. Boosting the protective roles of T  could also be beneficial42, although a destructive role of these cells has also been proposed105. These approaches would be desirable because they target the delayed phase of the injury and are anticipated to have a particularly wide therapeutic window. However, as noted above the role of lymphocytes in ischemic injury is poorly understood and the full implications of suppressing the action of specific T and B-cell populations remain to be defined.

Fighting inflammation: a double-edged sword?

As discussed earlier in this review, immune cells and inflammation play an important role in tissue repair and reorganization. These beneficial effects have to be considered in developing therapeutic approaches based on restraining post-ischemic inflammation. The concern is that counteracting the inflammatory response to ischemic injury may ameliorate the tissue damage in the acute phase, but it may compromise repair mechanisms and worsen the long-term outcome of the injury. Due to the paucity of experimental studies in the recovery phase, there is no definitive experimental evidence that anti-inflammatory treatments interfere with repair processes in the post-ischemic brain. However, pro-survival effects of immune cells stemming from growth factor production, neurogenesis and neuroplasticity are well-established (Table 2)105. The essential role of inflammation in tissue repair highlights the difficulties with approaches based on full-blown suppression of inflammation. Furthermore, in light of stroke-induced immunosuppression, the infectious complications of therapies suppressing inflammation also need to be taken into account (Table 3). Therapies based on immunomodulation, in which the overall immune response is deviated from a Th  to a Th -type response, also have a dark side. In models of MS, tolerization with myelin antigens induces a protective Th  response in the acute phase, but, in the long term, such Th  response promotes B-cell differentiation and leads to a humoral attack against myelin which worsens the neurological outcome106. A similar worsening in the chronic phase has also been reported in tolerization applied to models of cerebral ischemia107. Therefore, the delayed effects of humoral immunity could counteract the short-term benefit of suppression of cellular immunity. A more complete understanding of the immunology of stroke would enable the development of targeted approaches to selectively suppress the deleterious effects of inflammation.

Conclusions

Immunity and inflammation are an integral part of the pathogenic processes triggered by I/R. Inflammatory signaling is responsible for early molecular events triggered by the arterial occlusion and culminating in the invasion of the brain by blood-borne leukocytes. Although its ultimate goal is to reestablish homeostasis, inflammation inflicts considerable damage to the metastable penumbral tissue. Adaptive immunity is deeply involved in the central and peripheral events triggered by cerebral ischemia, but evidence that a classical autoimmune response against brain antigens unveiled by tissue damage contributes to the acute phase of the damage is lacking. Lymphocytes invade the ischemic brain and contribute to tissue damage, but the rapidity of their deleterious effect is not consistent with an adaptive immune response targeted to the brain. Remarkably, selected lymphocyte subpopulations are protective, acting to dampen the cytotoxic effects of other inflammatory cells and promoting tissue recovery. The mechanistic bases for this dichotomous response of lymphocytes remains to be elucidated (Fig. 3). Although the participation of inflammation and immunity in tissue recovery is well established in other organs, very little is known about these processes in the brain. Even less clear are the long-term effects of the adaptive immune response associated with stroke, and their role in the sequelae of ischemic damage, such as brain atrophy and dementia. Similarly, it is unclear if the immune system develops a memory of the antigen exposure and if an autoimmune response develops following subsequent exposure to the same antigen, as it may occur in cases of recurrent strokes. Although much has been learned on the interplay between the peripheral immunosuppression and the central immune activation associated with stroke, the impact that these processes have on short and long-term tissue outcome remains poorly understood. The realization that the immune system and inflammation are central to the pathophysiology of stroke has raised the prospect of new therapeutic approaches to counteract ischemic injury. However, our understanding of the crosstalk between the immune system and the ischemic brain is still rudimentary and, as suggested by failed clinical trials, not adequate to guide therapeutic interventions. Modulation of adaptive immunity may afford the opportunity to deviate the post-ischemic immune response away from tissue damage and towards protection, an approach very effective in stroke models. However, immunomodulation can also have deleterious effects that need to be considered. Nevertheless, the remarkable impact that modulation of the immune system has on stroke damage and repair, justifies the aggressive pursuit of basic and clinical investigations seeking to unravel the fundamental processes governing the interaction of the ischemic brain with the immune system.

Supplementary Material

 

Figure 1

Hypoxia, ROS and changes in shear stress initiate the cellular events induced by I/R. In the vessels lumen, I/R leads to blood clotting, platelet aggregation and cytokine release (IL-1α). Translocation of P-selectin on the surface of platelets and EC leads to platelet-leukocyte aggregation. Complement is activated and arachidonic acid metabolites are released. In the vascular wall, upregulation of E- and P-selectin on EC provides a platform for low affinity leukocyte binding through interaction with sialyl Lex moieties of glycoproteins expressed on leukocytes, e.g. PSGL-1. Firm adhesion is obtained after endothelial expression of ICAM-1 interacting with leukocyte β2 integrins (LFA-1 and Mac-1)144. Loss of NO promotes vasoconstriction and enhances leukocyte and platelet aggregation. MMP activation could lead to BBB breakdown and matrix proteolysis facilitating leukocyte extravasation. In the perivascular space, chemotactic complement subunits (C5a) acting on mast cell complement receptors (CD88) leads to degranulation and release of histamine and proteases, contributing to BBB leakiness. Cytokines (TNF, IL-1β) are produced by mast cells and perivascular macrophages, providing further signals to guide leukocyte migration across the vessel wall145,146. In the brain parenchyma, injured cells release purines (ATP), which act as early proinflammatory signals leading to production of cytokines and chemokines. Disruption of neuronal-microglial interaction (CX3CL1, CD200) and increases in extracellular glutamate (glu) acting on microglial GluR1 metabotropic receptor27 also contribute to the pro-inflammatory milieu.

Figure 2

Release of nucleotides (ATP, UTP) from injured cells, including neurons, activates purinergic receptors on microglia and macrophages, and leads to production of pro-inflammatory cytokines25. While most of these cytokines are transcriptionally induced, IL-1β and IL-18 are processed from their pro-peptides by the activity of interleukin-1 converting enzyme (ICE; caspase 1). ICE is embedded in a multi-protein complex (NLRP3 or inflammasome147) and is activated by microglial P2×7 receptors148. Ischemic cell death leads to the formation of danger associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) molecules, which activate TLRs, especially TLR2 and 421. DAMPs released by ischemia include HMGB1, an intracellular DNA binding protein released after cellular injury, HSP60, and β-amyloid (Aβ)149, among others30. TLRs, in concert with scavenger receptors such as CD36, upregulate pro-inflammatory gene expression through the transcription factor NF-κB30,150. DAMPs also derive from matrix breakdown by lytic enzymes released from dead cells and by the action of reactive oxygen species (ROS) on lipids. The cytokine production and complement activation resulting from these events leads to increased leukocyte infiltration and enhances tissue damage, which, in turn, produces more DAMPs. Antigens unveiled by tissue damage are presented to T cells, setting the stage for adaptive immunity.

Figure 3

In the acute phase of cerebral ischemia, unprimed T cells contribute to tissue damage in an antigen independent manner (innate immunity), possibly through IFNγ151 and ROS152 (left upper quadrant). γδT cells, activated by IL-23 released from microglia/macrophages, produce the cytotoxic cytokine IL-17 and contributes to acute ischemic brain injury41. However, T cells can also be protective. TGFβ produced by neurons, glia, or macroglia/macrophages promotes the development of T  cells secreting the protective cytokine IL-10 and inhibits Th1 and Th2 responses. T  cells are protective in models of cerebral ischemia42. Induction of mucosal tolerance with CNS antigens produces an adaptive response, which leads to the establishment of autoreactive Th2 cells producing IL-1048 and T  cells producing IL-10 and TGFβ107,141 is highly protective in experimental stroke (right lower quadrant). As discussed in the text, there is no evidence that adaptive immunity contributes to acute ischemic brain injury. However, weeks and months after stroke, autoreactive CD4+ and CD8+ T cells targeting CNS antigens could develop (right upper quadrant). The resulting cell death could play a role in the delayed brain damage and atrophy that occurs after stroke83.

Figure 4

Clearing of dead cells and suppression of inflammation are key events in brain repair. “Find-me signals” (UTP, ATP) attract microglia and macrophages through P2Y2 receptors. “Eat-me signals” include UDP, which act on P2Y6 receptors to stimulate microglial phagocytosis153, and phosphatidylserine (PtdSer), which is translocated to the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane of apoptotic cells154. PtdSer binding proteins involved in the clearance of dead cells include MGF-E8 on microglia155 and TIM4 on macrophages154. Immunoglobulins directed against CNS antigens, which appear after stroke (Table 2), may also promote phagocytosis by engaging Fc receptors on phagocytic cells. Phagocytosis promotes secretion of IL-10 and TGFβ56, which, in turn, suppress antigen presentation, promote T  formation, inhibit expression of adhesion molecules in EC and production of proinflammatory cytokines61,156. TGFβ and IL-10 are also neuroprotective157,158 and may facilitate brain repair processes. In addition, arachidonic and omega-3 fatty acids metabolites lipoxins, resolvins, and protectins, which play an active role in the resolution of inflammation in other organs55, could also contribute to suppress post-ischemic inflammation. Growth factors and MMPs produced by EC, neurons, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes and microglia are critical molecules driving tissue reorganization and repair63,159.

