A Novel Triple Repeat Mutant Tau Transgenic Model That Mimics Aspects of Pick’s Disease and Fronto-Temporal Tauopathies

Abstract

Tauopathies are a group of disorders leading to cognitive and behavioral impairment in the aging population. While four-repeat (4R) Tau is more abundant in corticobasal degeneration, progressive supranuclear palsy, and Alzheimer’s disease, three-repeat (3R) Tau is the most abundant splice, in Pick's disease. A number of transgenic models expressing wild-type and mutant forms of the 4R Tau have been developed. However, few models of three-repeat Tau are available. A transgenic mouse model expressing three-repeat Tau was developed bearing the mutations associated with familial forms of Pick's disease (L266V and G272V mutations). Two lines expressing high (Line 13) and low (Line 2) levels of the three-repeat mutant Tau were analyzed. By Western blot, using antibodies specific to three-repeat Tau, Line 13 expressed 5-times more Tau than Line 2. The Tau expressed by these mice was most abundant in the frontal-temporal cortex and limbic system and was phosphorylated at residues detected by the PHF-1, AT8, CP9 and CP13 antibodies. The higher-expressing mice displayed hyperactivity, memory deficits in the water maze and alterations in the round beam. The behavioral deficits started at 6-8 months of age and were associated with a progressive increase in the accumulation of 3R Tau. By immunocytochemistry, mice from Line 13 displayed extensive accumulation of 3R Tau in neuronal cells bodies in the pyramidal neurons of the neocortex, CA1-3 regions, and dentate gyrus of the hippocampus. Aggregates in the granular cells had a globus appearance and mimic Pick’s-like inclusions. There were abundant dystrophic neurites, astrogliosis and synapto-dendritic damage in the neocortex and hippocampus of the higher expresser line. The hippocampal lesions were moderately argyrophilic and Thioflavin-S negative. By electron microscopy, discrete straight filament aggregates were detected in some neurons in the hippocampus. This model holds promise for better understanding the natural history and progression of 3R tauopathies and their relationship with mitochondrial alterations and might be suitable for therapeutical testing.

Introduction

Taupathies are an important cause of cognitive and behavioral impairment in the aging population [1,2,3]. Disorders in which alterations in the cytoskeletal protein Tau is the predominant contributor to the neurodegenerative process are referred to as “primary tauopathies.” Tau is encoded by an alternatively spliced gene located on chromosome 17 (MAPT) [4]. In the nervous system there is a mixture of Tau proteins due to alternative splice forms, as well as post-translational modifications [5]. Exon 10 of MAPT is alternatively spliced to produce Tau isoforms with either three or four ~32 amino acid repeats, denominated as 3R and 4R Tau, respectively, in the microtubule binding domain of Tau protein [6]. For this reason, tauopathies are divided into those containing 3R, 4R of both species of Tau. Pick's disease (PiD) is a 3R tauopathy, while 4R Tau alone is predominantly present in corticobasal degeneration (CBD) and progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP). Both 3R and 4R Tau are found in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and FTDP-17T [1].

Pick’s Disease is a rare tauopathy, comprising a small proportion of the cases presenting with dementia [7]. Pick’s Disease is characterized by cortical atrophy associated with neuronal loss, gliosis and formation of Tau-positive, globular, intra-neuronal inclusions in the neocortex and limbic system denominated Pick bodies (PB’s) [1]. The clinical presentation with behavioral variant fronto-temporal dementia (bvFTD) is seen in PiD with fronto-temporal degeneration [8] while fronto-parietal atrophy presents with apraxia [9]. Mutations in the Tau gene microtubule associated protein Tau (MAPT) account for the majority of familial PiD cases [10,11,12]

Pick bodies are composed of 3R Tau [13,14] and are immunoreactive with antibodies against pTau epitopes, neurofilaments and ubiquitin. They are positive with the Bielschowsky silver stain and negative with the Gallyas silver stain and Thioflavin-S. By ultrastructural analysis the filaments in the PB’s are straight while in the neurofibrillary tangles in AD the filaments are twisted [13,14]. Tau-immunoreactive glial inclusions in oligodendroglia and astrocytes are detected in PiD, but they are not as frequent as in the 4R tauopathies. In PiD the glial inclusions contain predominantly 4R Tau [11]

To explore the mechanisms of pathogenesis and time course of events transgenic (tg) animal models of tauopathies expressing wild-type and mutant forms of the 4R Tau have been developed [15,16,17]. However, to date only a few rodent models expressing human 3R Tau have been generated [18,19]. For this purpose, we developed a tg mouse model expressing 3R Tau bearing the mutations associated with familial forms of PiD. For this model we overexpressed human 3R Tau with the L266V and G272V mutations under the neuronal mThy-1 promoter cassette. The G272V mutation has been reported in patients with hereditary PiD [10] characterized by fronto-temporal dementia with 3R Tau-positive Pick bodies and neuronal loss in the cortex and hippocampus. The L266V Tau mutation is associated with fronto-temporal dementia and Pick-like 3R and 4R tauopathy [11]. In this study we found that the transgenic line expressing higher levels of the mutant 3R Tau (L266V and G272V) displayed extensive time-dependent accumulation of 3R Tau in the neocortex and hippocampus, with inclusion formation, behavioral deficits and neurodegeneration that mimics some aspects of PiD.

Materials and Methods

Generation of mThy-1 3R Tau mutant transgenic mice

The University of California at San Diego’s animal subjects committee approved all experiments. Mice expressing human 3R Tau-bearing the mutations associated with familial PiD (L266V and G272V) under the neuronal mThy-1 promoter cassette (provided by Dr. H. van der Putten) were generated. The 3R Tau variant L266V and G272V was constructed by site-directed mutagenesis (QuikChange kit; Stratagene) and confirmed by DNA sequencing. The 3R Tau mutant cDNA fragment was ligated into pCRII (Invitrogen, La Jolla, CA), sequenced for accuracy, inserted into the mThy-1 expression cassette between exons 2 and 4, purified, and microinjected into single-cell embryos (C57BL/6 × DBA/2F1) [20]. Genomic DNA, extracted from tail biopsies, was analyzed by PCR amplification [21,22]. Heterozygous 3R Tau mutant mice were crossed with wt (DBA) mice to generate tg and non-tg littermates. Lines expressing lower (Line 2) and higher (Line 13) levels of 3R Tau were selected for analysis as previously described [20]. For RNA and biochemical analysis a total of N = 6 non-tg, N = 6 Line 2 tg and N = 6 Line 13 tg mice 3–4 months of age were generated. For behavioral and neuropathological analysis to compare the lines a total of N = 12 non-tg, N = 12 Line 2 tg, and N = 12 Line 13 tg mice 8–10 months of age were generated. For age-dependent studies, which include behavior, biochemistry and neuropathology, a total of 26 Line 13 tg mice were used, divided as follows 3–4 (N = 10), 6–8 (N = 8) and 12–14 (N = 8) months of age.

Behavioral Analysis

Context-dependent learning in an open field data was collected using a Kinder SmartFrame Cage Rack Station activity monitor system (Kinder Scientific, Poway, CA), in 3-dementional space using a 7×15 beam configuration. Data collection began when an animal was placed in the test chamber. Animals were evaluated for 10 min for three consecutive days, given a two-day dishabituation period, followed by a fourth trial [23,24].

Spatial learning and memory was investigated using the water maze. For this purpose, a pool (diameter 180 cm) was filled with opaque water (24°C) and mice were first trained to locate a visible platform (days 1–3) and then a submerged hidden platform (days 4–7) in three daily trials 2–3 min apart. Mice that failed to find the hidden platform within 90 seconds were placed on it for 30 seconds. The same platform location was used for all sessions and all mice. The starting point at which each mouse was placed into the water was changed randomly between two alternative entry points located at a similar distance from the platform. In addition, on the final day of testing the platform was removed and the time spent by mice in the correct quadrant was measured (Probe test). The duration of the probe test was 40 s. Time to reach the platform (escape latency) was recorded with a Noldus Instruments EthoVision video tracking system (San Diego Instruments, San Diego, CA) set to analyze two samples per second. The round beam test allows for the assessment of gait and balance impairments through distance traveled in an allotted amount of time over a round beam placed horizontally. As previously described [25], three consecutive trials, 1 min each, were run in one day. The total forward distance traveled and the numbers of foot slippages were recorded. Speed on the beam was calculated as distance traveled/time, and errors on the beam were calculated as foot slips/distance traveled.

Tissue Preparation

Following behavioral analysis, mice were sacrificed following NIH guidelines. All animal were deeply anesthetized with ketamine (100 mg/kg)/xylazine (10 mg/kg) and then decapitated. The right hemi-brain was post-fixed for 48 hours in 4% phosphate-buffered paraformaldehyde (pH 7.4) at 4°C and sagittal sectioned Vibratome 2000 (40 μm; Leica, Deerfield, IL). The left hemibrain was snap-frozen and stored at −70°C.

RNA Extraction and Quantification of mRNA by Real Time-PCR Analysis

RNA was extracted from the complete right hemibrain in triplicate using the RNAeasy kit (QIAGEN, Germantown, MD, USA) [20] and quantified by spectrophotometer readings. For cDNA synthesis, 1 μg total RNA was reverse transcribed using iScript cDNA Synthesis kit (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA). Real Time-PCR (RT-PCR) experiments were performed using the iQ5 Detection System (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA). Amplification was performed on cDNA equivalent to 25 ng total RNA with 1× iQ SYBRGreen Supermix (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA). Template PCR reactions were performed in triplicate and run in duplicate using the following PCR cycling parameters: 50°C for 2min, 95°C for 10min, and 40 cycles of 94°C for 15 s, 60°C for 1 min followed by a dissociation protocol to verify the presence of a single product for each amplicon. The amount of cDNA was calculated by the comparative threshold cycle method and expressed using mouse actin as an internal control.

Histochemistry, Immunohistochemistry and Image Analysis

Neuropathological analysis of the neuronal aggregates was performed utilizing the Bielchowsky silver stain, Gallyas silver method and Thioflavin-S. Briefly, manufacture’s protocol (American MasterTech, item# KTBIE; Lodi CA) was followed for the modified Bielschowsky’s staining kit. For Gallyas silver staining, all containers were acid-washed before use and metal was avoided. Slides were exposed to periodic acid (5%), rinsed in deionized water, placed in silver iodide solution, exposed to acetic acid, rinsed in deionized water, developed until sections turned a pale brown/gray before stopping the reaction, dehydrating and coverslipping the slides. For Thioflavin-S, mounted sections were postfixed in formalin (1:10), washed in PBS, exposed to potassium-permanganate (0.25% in PBS), washed and exposed to potassium metabisulfite (2%) and oxalic acid (1%), washed in water and stained in Thioflavin-S (0.015% in 50% ethanol) before being washed first in ethanol (50%) and then in water and coverslipped. Analysis of Tau expression was performed using free-floating, blind-coded sections [26,27]. Sections were incubated overnight at 4°C with antibodies against 3R Tau (1:250, Millipore), pTau (CP9, CP13, PHF-1; 1:500, gift from Peter Davies; AT8, 1:500, Pierce; AT270 1:500, Pierce), total Tau (t-Tau) (1:500, Dako), MC-1 (1:100, gift from Peter Davies), ubiquitin (1:100, Dako) and TDP43 (1:500, Proteintech) followed by biotin-tagged anti-rabbit or anti-mouse IgG1 secondary antibodies (1:100, Vector Laboratories, Inc., Burlingame, CA), Avidin D-HRP (1:200, ABC Elite, Vector), and visualized with diaminobenzidine. Sections were scanned with a digital Olympus bright field digital microscope (BX41). For comparison with the neuropathological analysis with the 3R Tau mice, samples from the frontal cortex from 3 PiD cases were obtained from patients evaluated neurologically and psychometrically at the Alzheimer Disease Research Center/University of California, San Diego [28].

Neurodegenerative pathology was analyzed using sections immunolabeled overnight with antibodies against the dendritic marker microtubule-associated protein-2 (MAP2; 1:500, Millipore), neuronal marker NeuN (1:500, Millipore), astroglial marker glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP, 1:1000, Millipore), and synaptic marker synaptophysin (SY38, 1:500, Millipore) [26,27]. Sections reacted with antibodies against NeuN or GFAP were incubated with secondary antibodies, Avidin D-HRP, and visualized with diaminobenzidine. Sections reacted with antibodies against MAP2 and synaptophysin were visualized with FITC-tagged secondary antibody or the Tyramide Signal Amplification Direct (Red) system (1:100, NEN Life Sciences, Boston, MA), respectively, mounted under glass coverslips with anti-fading media (Vector Laboratories), and imaged with the laser scanning confocal microscope (LSCM) (MRC1024, BioRad).

Analysis of levels of Tau and GFAP immunoreactivity was performed in layer 5 of the neocortex and in the hippocampus dentate gyrus with Image J and expressed as optical density. Briefly, for each section a total of four images were captured at 400X and converted to gray scale, opened with Image J, thesholded and a dynamic scale set to determine optical density. The numbers of NeuN-immunoreactive neurons were estimated utilizing unbiased stereological methods [29]. Hemi-sections containing the neocortex, hippocampus and striatum were outlined using an Olympus BX51 microscope running StereoInvestigator 8.21.1 software (Micro-BrightField, Cochester, VT). Grid size for the hippocampal CA3 pyramidal layer was: 300×300 μm, and the counting frame was 50×50 μm. The average coefficient of error for each region was 0.09 and average tissue thickness was 12 μm. Sections were analyzed using a 100×1.4 PlanApo oil-immersion objective. A 5 μm high disector, allowed for 2 μm top and bottom guard-zones. The volume of the neocortex was estimated using the same grid size and counting frame as used for counting the number of neurons.

Double Immunolabeling and Confocal Microscopy

To determine the localization of 3R Tau within synapses and dendrites, double-labeling experiments were performed [26]. Sections were immunolabeled with antibodies against human 3R Tau (1:5000; Millipore) and synaptophysin (1:250; mouse monoclonal, SY38, Millipore) or MAP2 (1:250; mouse monoclonal, Millipore). All sections were processed simultaneously, and experiments were performed in triplicate. The 3R Tau-aggregates terminals were detected with the Tyramide Red (NEN Life Sciences) whereas synapyophysin and MAP2 were detected with FITC-tagged antibodies (1:75, Vector, Burlingame, CA). Sections were imaged with a Zeiss 63X1.4 objective on an Axiovert 35 microscope (Zeiss) with an attached MRC1024 laser scanning confocal microscope (LSCM) system (BioRad) [26]. Paired optical sections were analyzed with ImageJ colocalization color map software to determine the percent of synaptophysin-positive terminals or MAP2 dendrites containing 3R Tau immunoreactivity. For each mouse, approximately 20 digital images, each containing 700 synapses on average, were analyzed. Percent neuropil was calculated based on area of intensity above threshold divided by the geometric area.

Tissue Fractionation and Immunoblot Analysis

The levels of Tau were analyzed using lysates that were extracted and fractioned into soluble and insoluble fractions by ultracentrifugation [26] utilizing the right hemibrain that includes the neocortex and hippocampus. Protein (20 μg/lane) from the insoluble fraction was loaded onto 4–12% SDS/PAGE gels and blotted onto PVDF membranes, incubated mouse monoclonal antibodies against total Tau (tTau), 3R Tau and pTau, followed by HRP-tagged secondary antibodies (1:5,000; Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Bands were visualized by enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL, PerkinElmer, Boston, MA) and analyzed with a quantitative Versadoc XL imaging apparatus (BioRad). β-Actin (1:3,000, Sigma) was used as the loading control. For comparison with the immunoblot assay in the 3R Tau mice, frozen samples from the frontal cortex from 3 PiD cases were obtained from patients evaluated neurologically and psychometrically at the Alzheimer Disease Research Center/University of California, San Diego [28].

Electron Microscopy and Immunogold Analysis

Vibratome sections from the left hemibrain (250 μm thick) from the non-tg and 3R Tau mice (Line 13) (n = 4 per group, ages 8–10 months) were post-fixed in 1% glutaraldehyde, treated with osmium tetroxide, embedded in epon araldite and blocks of the hippocampus were prepared and sectioned with the ultramicrotome (Leica, Germany) [26]. Grids were analyzed with a Zeiss OM10 electron microscope [30]. These same serial sections were utilized for analysis of synapses, dendrites and filaments. Immunogold-labeled, sections were mounted in nickel grids, etched and incubated with the 3R Tau antibody (1:50) and labeled with 10 nm Aurion ImmunoGold particles (1:50, Electron Microscopy Sciences, Fort Washington, PA) with silver enhancement. Electron micrographs (25,000 × magnification) were obtained.

Statistical Analysis

All analyses used GraphPad Prism (version 5.0). Differences among means were assessed by one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post-hoc test when compared to non-tg and by Tukey-Kramer when comparing tg groups. Two-way ANOVA with repeated measures followed by a Bonferroni multiple comparisons post-hoc test was used for analyzing the interactions between groups and time. The null hypothesis was rejected at the 0.05 level.

Results

Characterization and Comparison of mRNA and Protein Expression in Transgenic Mouse Lines Expressing Mutant 3R Tau

Following micro-injections and breeding, eight founder lines were obtained of which two (Lines 2 and 13) expressed significant levels of the 3R tau transgene under the control of the neuronal mThy-1 promoter (Fig. 1A) and were used for subsequent analysis. Brains from 3–4 old month mice were analyzed for expression of 3R Tau (Fig. 1B) and murine (mTau) at the mRNA (Fig. 1C) and protein levels (Fig. 1D). Quantitative PCR (qPCR) analysis of mRNA isolated from brain tissue demonstrated that Line 2 was a lower 3R Tau expresser while Line 13 expressed 8 fold higher levels (Fig. 1B). Consistent with the qPCR results, immunoblot analysis demonstrated that Line 13 was a higher expresser compared to Line 2 and non-tg mice. In the tg mice the bands at 50–55 kDa corresponding to total and 3R Tau co-migrated at levels similar to what it was detected in the PiD cases (Fig. 1D-F). The 3R Tau mutant tg mice also displayed bands immunoreactive with antibodies against pTau (PHF-1, CP9 and CP13) (Fig. 1D). Given that Line 13 was the higher expresser, next we investigated the effects of aging on Tau accumulation in this tg mouse line. We found that there was a time-dependent increase in accumulation of 3R Tau starting at 6–8 months of age with a concomitant increase in levels of T-Tau and p-Tau (PHF-1) that peaked at 12–14 months of age (Fig. 2A-D). However, levels of 3R Tau mRNA were the same overtime in the Line 13 mice (Fig. 2E).

Behavioral Deficits in Mice Expressing Mutant 3R Tau

Since accumulation of 3R Tau was more evident at later time points evaluation of the functional effects of mutant 3R Tau between Lines 2 and 13 was performed in mice between 8–10 m of age (Fig. 3). Analysis using a context-dependent open field showed a significant interaction between time and genotype, in addition to a significant effect due to time, as evaluated using a two-way ANOVA with repeated measures. Moreover, the non-tg and lower expresser 3R Tau Line 2 mice showed habituation to the novel environment, as evidenced by decreased activity at the various time points of the testing (Fig. 3A). In contrast, 3R Tau Line 13 mice displayed a continued high activity and failure to habituate (no learning; Fig. 3A) suggesting deficits in memory. To further investigate this possibility, mice were tested in the water maze (Fig. 3B-E). During the cued portion of the test both the non-tg and mutant 3R Tau tg mice performed as expected (Fig. 3B-C). However during the hidden portion of the test mice the higher expresser (Line 13) 3R Tau tg mice required a longer distance (Fig. 3B) and time (Fig. 3C) to find the platform compared to the non-tg. The lower expresser 3R Tau Line 2 mice were comparable to non-tg controls for distance but took longer time (Fig. 3C). On day 7, during the probe portion of the test both Lines 2 and 13 displayed impairments in memory retention (Fig. 3D); no visual alterations were detected (Fig. 3E). Motor testing in the round beam (Fig. 4A-C) showed that the non-tg and lower expresser 3R Tau Line 2 mice performed at a similar level and had a low error index when crossing the beam, while the 3R Tau Line 13 mice showed impairments with a higher rate of errors (Fig. 4C). Testing for spontaneous locomotor activity showed increased rearing (Fig. 4D) and total activity (Fig. 4E) in Line 13 and increased thigmotaxis in both 3R Tau lines (Fig. 4F), which is suggestive of anxiety.

Next we investigated the effects of aging on behaviour in the higher expresser Line 13 (Fig. 5). Analysis of memory using the context-dependent open field showed no alterations in 3–4 month old 3R Tau tg mice (Fig. 5A), while mice at 6–8 and 12–14 months of age displayed similar level of alteration as evaluated using a two-way ANOVA with repeated measures (Fig. 5A). Motor testing in the round beam (Fig. 5B) showed that at 3–4 months of age the higher expresser 3R Tau Line 13 mice performed at a similar level to non-tg when crossing the beam, while at 6–8 and 12–14 months of age the 3R Tau Line 13 mice showed impairments with a higher rate of errors (Fig. 5B). Testing for spontaneous locomotor activity showed increased total activity (Fig. 5C) in Line 13 mice beginning at 3–4 m of age with a time dependent increase 6–8 and 12–14 months of age (Fig. 5C).

Patterns of 3R Tau Immunoreactivity and Distribution in Tg Mice

Since higher levels of 3RTau accumulation were observed after 6–8 m of age, neuropathological comparison between Lines 2 and 13 was performed in mice 8–10 months of age. Immunocytochemical analysis with an antibody against 3R Tau showed as expected minimal or no immunoreactivity in the non-tg mice (Fig. 6A, B). In the brains of the transgenic mice from Line 2 there were mild levels of immunoreactivity while in Line 13 there was intense immunoreactivity in pyramidal neurons in layers II-III and V in the neocortex (Fig. 6A and B), and in pyramidal and granular cells in the hippocampus (Fig. 6A and C). Some of the immunoreactive pyramidal neurons and granular cells displayed a condensed and fibrilar appearance and in the dentate gyrus some showed a globular conformation (Fig. 6A bottom panels).

Immunocytochemical analysis with an antibody against pTau (PHF-1) displayed mild immunostaining of the neuropil and neurons in non-tg mice (Fig. 6D-F) and in the transgenic mice from Line 2. In contrast, in transgenic mice from Line 13 there was intense immunoreactivity in in layers II-III and V pyramidal neurons in the neocortex (Fig. 6D and E), and in pyramidal and granular cells in the hippocampus (Fig. 6D and F). Since there were higher expression levels of 3R Tau in Line 13, we next investigated the effect of aging on the immunoreactivity of 3R Tau in the neocortex and hippocampus in the higher expressing Line 13. There was an age-dependent increase in the immunoreactivity for 3R Tau in layers II-III and V pyramidal neurons in the neocortex (Fig. 7A and B) and hippocampus (Fig. 7C) at ages 6–8 months and 12–14 months. At the same time, there was an age-dependent decrease in the immunoreactivity for MAP2 in layers II-III and V pyramidal neurons in the neocortex (Fig. 7D and E) and hippocampus (Fig. 7F) at ages 6–8 months and 12–14 months.

Further analysis of the profile of the 3R Tau aggregates in the frontal cortex was performed by histochemistry and by immunohistochemistry with other antibodies against Tau in both Lines 2 and 13 at 8–10 months of age (Fig. 8A, B). This study showed that the aggregates in the frontal cortex were positive with the Bielchowsky silver stain but negative with Gallyas silver stain and Thioflavin-S (Fig. 8A, B). In contrast, the globular aggregates in the Line 13 mice were positive with the AT8, CP9, MC-1, PHF-1 and ubiquitin antibodies but negative for TDP43 (Fig. 8A, B). These intra-neuronal inclusions were similar in morphology and patterns of immunolabeling to Pick’s bodies, with exception that the Pick’s bodies are more dense and rounded (Fig. 8C).

Accumulation of Mutant 3R Tau Results in Mitochondrial Pathology, Axonal Dystrophy and Accumulation of Filaments

To further investigate the sub-cellular alterations in the 3R Tau tg mice, ultrastructural analysis was performed in the hippocampus dentate gyrus using transmitted electron microscopy and immunogold in mice 8–10 m of age. Compared to non-tg controls (Fig. 9A), mice from higher-expresser Line 13, showed alterations in the characteristics of the mitochondria (Fig. 9B), several were enlarged and elongated and displayed disorganized cresta (Fig. 9B). There was also extensive axonal dystrophy and synaptic with accumulation of electro-dense bodies (Fig. 9B). In addition, in the dendrites there was accumulation of lamellar bodies and straight filamentous structures (Fig. 9B). Immunogold analysis was performed to ascertain if these ultrastructural alterations were associated with the accumulation of 3R Tau (Fig. 9C, D). In the higher-expresser 3R Tau mice, abundant gold particles were detected in the dendrites in association with filaments (Fig. 9D), compared to the non-tg controls (Fig. 9C).

Neurodegenerative Pathology in 3R Tau Mice

To determine if the accumulation of mutant 3R Tau in the neocortex and hippocampus results in neurodegenerative pathology, immunohistochemical analysis was performed (Fig. 10) in mice 8–10 months old. Analysis of neuronal density with the NeuN antibody showed that compared to the non-tg and 3R Tau Line 2, the 3R Tau Line 13 mice had a significant reduction in the number of neurons in the CA3 and dentate gyrus of the hippocampus (Fig. 10A, C). Similarly, there was a decrease in the neocortical volume when comparing non-tg (70.04 ± 1.4 mm3) to Line 13 (63.68 ± 1.6 mm3), but not in Line 2 (67.88 ± 2.1 mm3) when compared by one-way ANOVA with post hoc Dunnett’s test. Likewise, analysis of dendrites with an antibody against MAP2 displayed a significant 20–40% loss in the hippocampus of the higher-expressing Line 13 but not in Line 2 (Fig. 10B, D). Consistent with the age-related behavioral studies and analysis 3R Tau accumulation, analysis of MAP2 showed that dendritic density in the neocortex and hippocampus was preserved in 3R Tau tg mice (Line 13) 3–4 months of age, but was diminished in the older groups (Fig. 7D-F).

To determine the relationship between neurodegeneration and accumulation of 3R Tau double labelling and confocal microscopy analysis was performed. This study showed that in addition to the somatic accumulation in the tg mice 3R Tau accumulates in synaptophysin positive presynaptic terminals (Fig. 10E, F) as well as in MAP2 immunoreactive dendrites (Fig. 10G, H). The accumulation of 3R Tau in presynaptic terminals and dendrites as expressed as percent of co-localization was more extensive and abundant in the higher expresser Line 13 compared to Line 2 (Fig. 10F, H).

These neuronal alterations were accompanied by a significant increase in GFAP immunoreactivity in the neocortex and hippocampus in both of the mutant 3R Tau Lines 2 and 13 (Fig. 11A, B). In these mice, 3R Tau positive glial cells were detected in the hippocampus (Fig. 11A bottom panel). Double labelling and confocal microscopy studies confirmed that glial cells with 3R Tau immunoreactivity were also GFAP positive (Fig. 11C, D). Taken together, these results support the notion that overexpression of mutant 3R Tau results in neurodegenerative pathology and Tau accumulation that mimics certain aspects of tauopathies such as PiD.

Discussion

In the present study, we investigated the effects of long-term expression of mutant 3R Tau in tg mice to model aspects of the pathogenesis of PiD. We found that mice expressing high levels of 3R Tau displayed hyperactivity, memory deficits in the water maze and alterations in the round beam. Moreover, there was extensive accumulation of 3R Tau in neuronal cells bodies in pyramidal neurons in the neocortex, CA1-3 regions and dentate gyrus mimicking the appearance of Pick’s like inclusions. These intra-neuronal aggregates were Thioflavin-S negative and positive with Bielchowsky silver impregnation and with antibodies against 3R Tau, PHF-1, AT8 and other pTau epitopes. Consistent with these findings in patients with PiD, there is extensive and progressive accumulation of 3R Tau in with the formation of Pick bodies in pyramidal and granular cell neurons in the neocortex and limbic system. The histochemical and immunocytochemical profile of the inclusions in the mutant 3R Tau mice was similar to what has been described for PiD, with the only difference being that the inclusions in PiD were more dense and contained abundant straight filaments and, in our case, the inclusions were less dense and contained only occasional straight filaments. In addition these mice developed axonal and mitochondrial pathology, neuronal loss and synapto-dendritic damage and astrogliosis in the neocortex and hippocampus mimicking several other pathological features of PiD.

This is the first tg mouse model developed to express 3R Tau with mutations associated with familial PiD. In contrast, previous 3R Tau tg models generated were designed to express wt 3R Tau in mouse or truncated 3R Tau in rat [18,19]. Otherwise all the mutant Tau tg mouse models that have been developed to date express 4R Tau rather than 3R Tau and the mutations are those associated with FTLD-17 and other tauopathies. The first model developed was designed to express wild type 3R Tau under the PrP promoter [19]. These mice were shown to develop insoluble intraneuronal filamentous hyperphosphorylated Tau inclusions in cortex and most robustly in the spinal cord. The inclusion pathology appeared at 6–9 months of age. In addition, these 3R Tau tg mice showed axonal degeneration, motor weakness, and gliosis. A later study showed that the neurofibrillary tangle-like inclusions appeared in this model at 18–20 months of age [31]. Thus, these animals were proposed as a model for tauopathy-associated diseases such as FTDP-17, AD and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/Parkinsonism-dementia complex (ALS/PDC) [19]. Further behavioral characterization of these mice showed 7–8 month-old Tau-tg mice overexpressing wild type 3R Tau demonstrated enhanced behavior in the passive avoidance test as well as increased motor behavior in the open field and in the elevated plus maze [32].

The other model recently developed expresses truncated 3R Tau (151–391) under the mThy-1 promoter [18]. The rats developed age-dependent neurofibrillary pathology in the cortical brain areas. The neurofibrillary lesions in the rat were silver positive, Congo red birefringence, Thioflavin-S positive and immunoreacted with a variety of antibodies used to detect hyperphosphorylated forms of Tau protein. Biochemical analysis confirmed the presence of sarkosyl insoluble Tau protein complexes consisting of rat endogenous and truncated Tau species. These 3R Tau tg rats did not show neuronal loss either in the cortex or in the hippocampus. For our model we overexpressed human 3R Tau with the L266V and G272V mutations under the neuronal mThy-1 promoter cassette. The G272V mutation has been reported in patients with hereditary PiD [10] and the L266V Tau mutation is associated with fronto-temporal dementia and Pick-like tauopathy [11,33]. In contrast to the other 3R Tau tg models that have been reported to show neurofibrillary pathology mimicking FTLD-17 or AD [18], the inclusions we found were Thioflavin-S and Gallyas negative and pTau and Bielchowsky positive which is more consistent with the profile described in the lesions of PiD than with NFT’s of AD. Furthermore, ultrastructure demonstrated the presence of straight rather than twisted filaments. Finally, while other models have shown modest neurodegeneration and behavioral deficits, our mice displayed extensive axonal and neurodegenerative pathology in the neocortex and limbic system following a distribution similar to PiD accompanied by substantial behavioral deficits.

Transgenic mice expressing 4R Tau with the G272V and P301S under the Thy1.2-promoter have been shown to display Tau pathology with neurofibrillary tangle-like inclusions and PHF-like filaments. These mice also presented synaptic transmission deficits increased anxiety, delayed learning and reduced spatial memory at 10 months but no motor alterations [34]. Taken together these results suggest that expression of the G272V mutation in the 4R Tau results in neurofibrillary tangle-like pathology, while the same mutation in 3R Tau results in PiD pathology. Likewise wild type 3R Tau triggers neurofibrillary pathology in mice and rats while mutations in the 3R Tau results in PiD pathology in mice. The mechanisms as to how overexpression of wt or truncated 3R Tau results in AD-like neurofibrillary pathology while the L266V and G272V mutant 3R Tau mimics PiD is unclear. However previous studies have shown that these mutations promote phosphorylation at Ser(202) and reduce the microtubule assembly-promoting activity of Tau in vitro [35]. This is consistent with studies showing that substitutions G272V (in both 3-repeat and 4-repeat Tau contexts), DeltaK280, and P301L all showed significant reduced capacity to regulate microtubule dynamic instability relative to wild-type Tau. Overall, these results suggest a model in which these mutations lead to neurodegeneration by reducing the ability of Tau to properly regulate microtubule dynamics [36]. Supporting the possibility that the mutant 3R Tau might disrupt microtubule dynamics, our ultrastructural study showed widespread axonal pathology in the tg mice as well as synapto-dendritic accumulation of mutant 3R Tau associated with neurodegeneration. These mice also displayed mitochondrial alterations; this is consistent with recent studies that have proposed a role for mitochondrial alterations in tauopathies [37,38,39].

Another interesting finding from our model was the presence of 3R Tau inclusions in glial cells. Tau positive glial inclusions have been reported in PiD as well as in other tauopathies [1]. Tau-immunoreactive glial inclusions in PiD are found in oligodendroglia and ramified astrocytes, but they are not as frequent as in the 4R tauopathies [1]. Remarkably, the glial lesions in PiD contain predominantly 4R Tau [11], which may explain the ratio between 3R and 4R Tau observed in PiD [40]. In tg mice expressing the 4R Tau G272V under the prion protein promoter with an autoregulatory transactivator loop, glial filaments formed in oligodendrocytes [41]. Immunogold electron microscopy with antibodies AT8 or AT100 identified several sparsely gold-labeled 6 nm filaments. In the spinal cord, fibrillary inclusions were also identified by Thioflavin-S fluorescent microscopy in oligodendrocytes and motor neurons. They concluded that expression of the 4R Tau G272V mutation in mice triggers oligodendroglial fibrillary lesions that are similar to those seen in human tauopathies [41]. In our model, given that the mutant Tau was expressed from a neuronal promoter, the present of 3R Tau in glial cells suggests either ectopic expression or transmission of Tau from neuron to glial cells. We have previously reported that for example α-synuclein can be transferred from neurons to astroglial cells [42] and recent studies support the possibility that Tau can transmit from cell to cell [43,44].

Taken together these results support the notion that high level expression of mutant 3R Tau in mice results in behavioral deficits and neuropathology that mimics some aspects of tauopathies such as PiD. This new model holds promise toward helping to better understand the natural history and progression of 3R tauopathies and their relationship with mitochondrial alterations. This model might also be suitable for therapeutical testing.

Fig 1

  . Diagram of the mThy-1 construct with the mutant 3R Tau.  . Levels of human 3R Tau and   murine Tau mRNA expressed as a ratio to the housekeeping gene GAPDH in non-tg and 3R Tau Lines 2, and 13.  . Representative Western blot (SDS) and analysis of the levels of   Total Tau and   3R Tau with the insoluble (membrane) fractions showing that Line 13 was a higher expresser of total Tau and 3R Tau compared to Line 2 and non-tg mice. Across all lines Tau was detected as double bands between 50–60 kDa. In the Pick’s Disease cases 3R Tau co-migrated at a similar level as in the 3R Tau tg mice. For analysis, N = 6 non-tg and N = 6 mThy-1 3R Tau tg mice (3–4 months old) from each line were utilized. * = P < 0.05 when compared to non-tg control using one way ANOVA with Dunnett’s posthoc test. # = P < 0.05 when comparing Line 2 and 13 using one way ANOVA with Fisher’s posthoc test.

Fig 2

   Representative Western blot (SDS) and analysis of levels of   3R Tau,   Total Tau, and   PHF-1. Across all antibodies there was a significant increase in the amount of protein at the older time points (12–14 months of age) compared to the earliest time point (3–4 months of age) and non-tg mice.  . Levels of 3R Tau mRNA levels at 3–4, 6–8, and 12–14 months of age were uniformly increased compared to non-tg mice. N = 8 for each age group * = P < 0.05 when compared to non-tg control using one way ANOVA with Dunnett’s posthoc test. # = P < 0.05 when comparing Line 2 and 13 using one way ANOVA with Fisher’s post hoc test.

Fig 3

Mice were evaluated for context-dependent learning in an open field area at 8–10 months using a Kinder SmartFrame Cage Rack Station activity monitor system.  . Non-tg controls and 3R Tau tg Line 2 (lower-expresser) mice had reduced levels of activity over time as they became more familiar with the environment in the cage.  . Water maze testing presented as distance traveled and time to find the platform, respectively. During the cued portion of the test both the non-tg and mutant 3R Tau tg mice performed as expected. However during the hidden portion of the test, the higher expresser (Line 13) 3R Tau tg mice took a longer time and went a farther distance to find the platform compared to the non-tg. The lower expresser 3R Tau Line 2 mice was comparable to non-tg controls for distance but took longer a time to find the platform during the hidden portion of the test.  . At day 8, during the probe portion of the test (with platform removed) both Lines 2 and 13 displayed impairments in memory retention,  . Probe test with the visual platform confirmed that no visual alterations were detected. N = 12 non-tg, N = 12 3R Tau tg Line 2, N = 12 3R Tau tg Line 13. * = P < 0.05 compared with non-tg by one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post hoc analysis. # = P < 0.05 when comparing Line 2 and 13 using one way ANOVA with Fisher’s posthoc test.

Fig 4

  . Mice were evaluated for motor functioning in a round beam apparatus. Compared to non-tg controls and Line 2 mice, the 3R Tau tg mice Line 13 displayed increased numbers of errors when walking in the round beam.  . Mice were evaluated for activity in a Kinder SmartFrame Cage Rack Station activity monitor system. Compared to non-tg controls and Line 2 mice, the 3R Tau tg mice Line 13 displayed increased rearing, total activity and thigmotaxis. (One-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s multiple comparisons post-hoc test). Mice are 8–10 month old. N = 12 non-tg, N = 12 3R Tau tg Line 2, N = 12 3R Tau tg Line 13. * = P < 0.05 compared with non-tg by one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post hoc analysis. # = P < 0.05 when comparing Line 2 and 13 using one way ANOVA with Fisher’s posthoc test.

Fig 5

  . Context-dependent open field showed no alterations in 3–4 m old 3RTau tg mice, while mice at 6–8 and 12–14 months of age displayed similar level of alteration.  . Motor testing in the round beam showed that at 3–4 months of age the higher expresser 3R Tau Line 13 mice performed at a similar level to non-tg when crossing the beam, while at 6–8 and 12–14 months of age the 3R Tau Line 13 mice showed impairments with a higher rate of errors.  . Testing for spontaneous locomotor activity showed increased total activity in Line 13 mice beginning at 3–4 m of age with a time dependent increase 6–8 and 12–14 m of age. 3–4 (N = 10), 6–8 (N = 8) and 12–14 (N = 8) months of age. * = P < 0.05 when compared to non-tg control using one way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post hoc test.

Fig 6

  . Vibratome sections were immunostained with an antibody against 3R Tau and analyzed by digital bright field microscopy. Panels to the left are low-magnification (20X) photomicrographs of regions of interest, including the neocortex, hippocampus CA1 and dentate gyrus (DG) regions in the non-tg and mutant 3R Tau tg Lines 2 and 13 lines mice. Panels to the right are higher magnification (600X) of the corresponding regions displaying low levels of 3R Tau immunoreactivity in neuronal cells bodies in Line 2 and high levels of immunostaining in Line 13.  . Image analysis of numbers of neuronal cells in the neocortex and   dentate gyrus displaying 3R Tau aggregates.  . Vibratome sections were immunostained with the PHF-1 antibody against pTau (Ser396 and Ser404) and analyzed by digital bright field microscopy. Panels to the left are low-magnification (20X) photomicrographs of regions of interest, including the neocortex, hippocampus CA1 and DG regions in the non-tg and mutant 3R Tau tg Lines 2 and 13. Panels to the right are higher magnification (600X) of the corresponding regions displaying low levels of PHF-1 immunoreactivity in neuronal cells bodies in Line 2 and high levels of immunostaining in Line 13. Image analysis of the overall levels of PHF-1 immunoreactivity expressed as optical density in the   neocortex and   dentate gyrus. Mice were 8–10 month old. N = 12 non-tg, N = 12 3R Tau tg Line 2, N = 12 3R Tau tg Line 13. * = P < 0.05 compared with non-tg by one-way ANOVA with Dunnet post hoc analysis. # = P < 0.05 when comparing Line 2 and 13 using one way ANOVA with Tukey-Kramer posthoc test. Low magnification box scale bar = 250 μm; high power panels scale bar = 25 μm.

Fig 7

  . Age-dependent increase in the immunoreactivity for 3R Tau in layers II-III and V pyramidal neurons in the neocortex and quantification in the   neocortex and   hippocampus at ages 3–4, 6–8, and 12–14 months of age in Line 13 and non-tg.  . Visualization of MAP2 immunoreactive dendritic densities in the neocortex at ages 3–4, 6–8, and 12–14 months of age in Line 13 and non-tg. Quantification of MAP2 immunoreactivity in the   neocortex and   hippocampus showed that the dendritic densities were preserved in 3R Tau tg mice (Line 13) 3–4 months of age, but were diminished in the older groups. 3–4 (N = 10), 6–8 (N = 8) and 12–14 (N = 8) months of age. * = P < 0.05 when compared to non-tg control using one way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post hoc test.

Fig 8

  . Representative photomicrographs (frontal cortex) of brain sections from the higher expresser Line 13 mice stained with Bielchowsky and Gallyas silver impregnation technique and Thioflavin-S and immunostained with the antibodies against 3R Tau, pTau (AT8, CP9, MC-1, PHF-1) and ubiquitin.  . Summary table with semiquantitative assessment of the abundance of pathological Tau lesions in the brains of the mutant 3R Tau tg mice.  . Representative photomicrographs of frontal cortex from a Pick’s disease case immunostained for 3R Tau, AT8, and ubiquitin. Scale bar = 10 μm. Mice were 8–10 months old from each line.

Fig 9

Vibratome sections were post-fixed with glutaraldehyde and embedded in epon-araldyte, and ultra-thin sections from the hippocampus were prepared for transmitted electron microscopy (TEM) and immunogold analysis.  . Representative electron micrographs from the neuropil of non-tg mice displaying normal characteristics for dentate granular (DG) cells, mitochondria, axons, synapses and dendrites.  . In the neuropil of the higher mutant 3R Tau tg Line 13 the mitochondria were enlarged and irregular, there were extensive axonal dystrophy and accumulation of electrodense bodies in dendrites and synapses accompanied by filamentous aggregates.  . In the non-tg no immunogold labeling was observed.  . With an antibody against 3R Tau, the intra-neuronal filamentous aggregates were decorated by gold particles in the tg mice. Mice were aged 8–10 months. Bar for A and B = 1 μm, for C and D = 100 nm.

Fig 10

  . Vibratome sections were immunostained with antibodies against the neuronal marker NeuN (visualized with DAB, bright field microscopy) and the dendritic marker MAP2 (visualized with FITC, confocal microscopy). Compared to the non-tg and lower expresser Line 2, Line 13 mice had decreased immunoreactivity in the neocortex (arrows) and hippocampus (arrowheads).  . Image analysis for the numbers of NeuN positive cells and area of the neuropil covered by MAP2 immunoreactive dendrites in the hippocampus showing a significant reduction in the mutant 3RTau tg Line 13 compared to Line 2 and non-tg controls.  . Sections were double-labeled with antibodies against human 3R Tau (red channel) and synaptophysin (SY38, green channel) and imaged with the laser scanning confocal microscope. Split panels show the somatic and synaptic localization of 3RTau and co-localization with synaptophysin in the hippocampus. The box to the right represents a zoomed area for the dashed box to the left showing details about the co-localization.  . Image analysis for the % of synaptophysin terminals showing 3R Tau immunoreactivity.  . Sections were double-labeled with antibodies against human 3R Tau (red channel) and MAP2 (green channel) and imaged with the laser scanning confocal microscope. Split panels show the somatic and dendritic localization of 3R Tau in the hippocampus. The box to the right represents a zoomed area for the dashed box to the left showing details about the co-localization.  . Image analysis for the percent of MAP2 dendrites showing 3R Tau immunoreactivity between the two synaptic markers. Scale bars in the single channel images = 25 μm and 5 μm in the enlarged merged images. Mice were 8–10 month old. N = 12 non-tg, N = 12 3R Tau tg Line 2, N = 12 3R Tau tg Line 13. * = P < 0.05 and ** = P < 0.01, respectively, compared with non-tg by one-way ANOVA with Dunnet post hoc analysis.

Fig 11

  . Sections were immunolabeled with antibodies against GFAP and imaged with a digital bright field microscope. Representative low power (20X) photomicrographs of the neocortex and hippocampus from non-tg and mutant 3R Tau tg mice displaying increased GFAP immunoreactivity in the tg mice. Higher magnification (600X) images of the hippocampus corresponding to the area in the box showing the astroglial cells in the hippocampus. Bottom panel represents cells immunostained with antibody against 3R Tau displaying a glial-like appearance.  . Image analysis for levels of GFAP immunoreactivity in the hippocampus expressed as optical density showing increased levels in tg mice compared to non-tg controls.  . Sections double-labeled with antibodies against GFAP (green channel) and human 3R Tau (red channel) and imaged with the laser scanning confocal microscope. Split panels showing processes of astroglial cells displaying localization of 3R Tau (arrows).  . Image analysis for the percent of GFAP positive cells showing 3R Tau immunoreactivity. Mice were 8–10 month old. N = 12 non-tg, N = 12 3R Tau tg Line 2, N = 12 3R Tau tg Line 13. * = P < 0.05 compared with non-tg by one-way ANOVA with Dunnet post hoc analysis. Scale bar for upper panel in A = 100 μm and 50 μm for the lower panel. Scale bar for panel in C = 10 μm.

