Effects of Novel Calpain Inhibitors in Transgenic Animal Model of Parkinson’s disease/dementia with Lewy bodies

Abstract

Parkinson’s disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) are neurodegenerative disorders of the aging population characterized by the accumulation of α-synuclein (α-syn). The mechanisms triggering α-syn toxicity are not completely understood, however, c-terminus truncation of α-syn by proteases such as calpain may have a role. Therefore, inhibition of calpain may be of value. The main objective of this study was to evaluate the effects of systemically administered novel low molecular weight calpain inhibitors on α-syn pathology in a transgenic mouse model. For this purpose, non-tg and α-syn tg mice received the calpain inhibitors - Gabadur, Neurodur or a vehicle, twice a day for 30 days. Immunocytochemical analysis showed a 60% reduction in α-syn deposition using Gabadur and a 40% reduction using Neurodur with a concomitant reduction in c-terminus α-syn and improvements in neurodegeneration. Western blot analysis showed a 77% decrease in α-spectrin breakdown products (SBDPs) SBDPs with Gabadur and 63% reduction using Neurodur. There was a 65% reduction in the active calpain form with Gabadur and a 45% reduction with Neurodur. Moreover, treatment with calpain inhibitors improved activity performance of the α-syn tg mice. Taken together, this study suggests that calpain inhibition might be considered in the treatment of synucleinopathies.

Introduction

Parkinson’s disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies are progressive neurological disorders of the aging population characterized by degeneration of dopaminergic and non-dopaminergic neurons associated with accumulation of α-synuclein (α-syn)1–4. The molecular mechanisms through which α-syn mediates neurodegeneration in PD and DLB are poorly understood. While some studies have focused on understanding the toxic capabilities of α-syn oligomers5,6, protofibrils and fibrils, more recent studies have advanced the possibility that cell to cell transmission7 and prion-like seeded propagation of α-syn might have a major role8,9. Remarkably, among the post-translational modifications involved in the pathogenesis of PD/DLB the c-terminus truncation of α-syn (aa 116–121) has been shown to promote aggregation, propagation, and toxicity10. This truncation of α-syn can be triggered by stress, physical activity and enzymatic cleavage by calpain and metaloproteases11–13. Calpain, a ubiquitous cysteine protease found in the CNS, has been implicated in several neurodegenerative diseases including PD14,15. In PD and DLB levels of calpain expression and activity are elevated in the brain leading to synaptic dysfunction and neuronal death13,16. Given the role of calpain in the disease process, its inhibition might represent an appealing therapeutic option. In this study, we report the effects of two newly developed calpain inhibitors (Gabadur and Neurodur) in a transgenic animal model of α-syn accumulation in PD/DLB. The advantage of these 2 compounds compared to other calpain inhibitors is their ability to cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB)17. In the case of Gabadur, this was achieved by combining the modified anti-seizure/pain medication Pregabalin as a vehicle to cross the BBB and leupeptin as a calpain inhibitor. Whereas Neurodur was synthesized by attaching the carboxyl group of cysteic acid to the leucyl-argininal of Leupeptin18. This enables Neurodur to use taurine transporters to cross the BBB. Moreover, the carrier molecule taurine by itself has anti-inflammatory, calpain inhibitory and calpastatin upregulatory effects18. We show that both calpain inhibitors reduced the accumulation of α-syn and neurodegeneration in the hippocampus and the associated deficits. This study suggests that calpain inhibition might be considered as a viable therapeutic target for synucleinopathies such as PD/DLB.

Results

Calpain inhibitors reduce α-syn pathology in the CNS of transgenic mice

Since in PD/DLB, α-syn pathology and neurodegeneration has been associated with increased calpain activity, we wanted to test if blocking this protease with two novel calpain inhibitor compounds that cross the BBB might ameliorate the pathology. For this purpose α-syn, tg mice (n = 10 per group) were treated with either Gabadur or Neurodur for 30 days at a dosage of 1 mg/mouse by IP injection twice a day and compared to vehicle-treated non-tg mice (n = 8) to evaluate activity, neuropathology, and biochemistry. To verify target engagement using an indirect method, brain homogenates were analyzed by immunoblot to assess the shift in calpain bands and SBDPs. Compared to the non-tg mice, the vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice displayed a 33% increase in the calpain band at 78 kDa (Fig. 1a,b), in contrast, treatment with Gabadur or Neurodur reduced the 78 kDa calpain band by 45% and 35% respectively when compared to vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice (F = 13.75, p < 0.001) (Fig. 1a,b). Next, we analyzed by immunoblot α-spectrin which is known to be degraded by calpain in the CNS. Calpain, when activated, degrades the 230-kDa subunit of the cytoskeletal protein α-spectrin to yield a 150-kDa calpain-cleaved breakdown fragment which was further degraded to a 145-kDa product. As expected, compared to the non-tg mice, the vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice showed a 39% increase in SBDPs (Fig. 1c), whereas treatment with Gabadur or Neurodur decreased SBDPs by 72% and 40%, respectively, when compared to vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice (F = 31.95, p < 0.0001) (Fig. 1c).

When compared to the non-tg control, immunocytochemical analysis with an antibody against total α-syn showed as expected in this line of α-syn tg mice extensive accumulation in the neuropil and neuronal cell bodies in the deeper layers of the neocortex (Fig. 2a,b) and CA3 of the hippocampus (Fig. 2a,c). Treatment with Gabadur or Neurodur resulted in 53% and 39% decreases, respectively, in the accumulation of α-syn in the neocortex (F = 29.14, p < 0.0001) (Fig. 2a,b) when compared to vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice. Likewise, Gabadur reduced α-syn aggregates in the hippocampus by 60% and Neurodur by 37% when compared to vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice (F = 42.55, p < 0.0001) (Fig. 2a,c).

Since it has been proposed that among other mechanisms calpain might trigger pathology by cleaving α-syn in the c-terminus10 we next analyzed the tissue sections with the SYN105 antibody that we have shown to recognize the α-syn cleaved at aa 11816. As expected no immunoreactivity was observed in the non-tg controls, in contrast, vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice displayed considerably increased immunostaining of neuritic processes in the neuropil and neuronal cell bodies in the deeper layers of the neocortex (Fig. 3a,b) and CA3 of the hippocampus (Fig. 3a,c). Treatment with Gabadur or Neurodur resulted in 35% and 38% decreases, respectively, in the accumulation of c-terminus truncated α-syn in the neocortex (F = 69.76, p < 0.0001) (Fig. 3a,c) when compared to vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice. Moreover, Gabadur and Neurodur reduced accumulation of c-terminally truncated α-syn in the hippocampus by 30% when compared to vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice (F = 66.82, p < 0.0001) (Fig. 3a,c).

To confirm these findings using an independent approach, immunoblot analysis was performed. As expected, in the cytosolic fraction, levels of total α-syn were increased in the tg mice compared to the vehicle-treated non-tg controls (Fig. 4a,b). No differences were observed between the vehicle α-syn tg and the Gabadur-treated mice, however, mice treated with Neurodur displayed increased soluble 14 kDa monomer band of α-syn (F = 36.85, p < 0.001) (Fig. 4a,b). In the particulate fraction, the antibody against total α-syn identified α-syn as a band at approximately 14 kDa in the non-tg mice. In vehicle-treated α-syn mice, this band had a 3-fold increase and the presence of a smear at a higher molecular weight, probably representing oligomers, was also detected (Fig. 4c,d). Treatment with Gabadur and Neurodur resulted in a reduction of the membrane α-syn low and higher molecular weight species by 35% when compared to vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice (F = 33.57, p < 0.0001) (Fig. 4c,d). By western blot, c-terminally truncated α-syn was identified as a single band at 12 kDa in the vehicle α-syn tg mice in the cytosolic (Fig. 4a,b) and membrane fractions (Fig. 4c,d), while no signal was detected in the non-tg mice (Fig. 4a,c). Treatment with Gabadur and Neurodur reduced accumulation of c-terminally truncated α-syn in the cytosolic (Fig. 4a,b) (F = 12.79, p = 0.002) and particulate fractions by approximately 35% and 65% when compared to vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice (F = 18.75, p < 0.0001) (Fig. 4c,d).

Calpain inhibitors ameliorate α-syn mediated neurodegeneration and associated deficits in the transgenic mice

We have previously shown that accumulation of full length and c-terminally truncated α-syn results in neurodegeneration of the deeper layers of the neocortex and the CA3 region of the hippocampus in this line of tg mice. When compared to the non-tg vehicle control, immunocytochemical analysis with an antibody against the neuronal marker NeuN showed a 16% loss of neurons in the deeper layers of the neocortex (F = 8.147, p = 0.0003) (Fig. 5a,b) and 34% loss in the CA3 region of the hippocampus (Fig. 5a,c) in the vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice. Treatment with Gabadur or Neurodur had no significant effects in the neocortex (Fig. 5a,b) but ameliorated the loss of neurons in the CA3 region of the hippocampus (F = 13.88, p < 0.0001) (Fig. 5a,c) when compared to vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice.

Next, we analyzed the effects of the calpain inhibitors on neuroinflammation. When compared to the non-tg vehicle control, immunocytochemical analysis with an antibody against the astroglial marker GFAP showed a 25% increased in this marker in the deeper layers of the neocortex (F = 8.846, p = 0.002) (Fig. 6a,b) and a 15% increase in the CA3 region of the hippocampus (F = 10.73, p = 0.0001) (Fig. 6a,c) in the vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice. Treatment with Gabadur or Neurodur had no significant effects in the overall density of astroglial cells neocortex (Fig. 6a,b) or the CA3 region of the hippocampus (Fig. 6a,c) when compared to vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice; however, astroglial cells were less ramified in mice treated with Gabadur (p = 0.0003) or Neurodur (p = 0.0007) compared to vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice (Fig. 6d). Immunocytochemical analysis with an antibody against the microglial marker Iba-1 showed a 19% increase in microgliosis in the neocortex (F = 19.38, p < 0.001) (Fig. 6e,f) and 28% increase in the CA3 region of the hippocampus (F = 16.22, p < 0.001) (Fig. 6e,g) in the vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice. Here, treatment with Gabadur (p < 0.0096) or Neurodur (P < 0.0001) significantly reduced the levels of microgliosis in the neocortex (Fig. 6e,f) and CA3 region of the hippocampus (Fig. 6e,g) to levels comparable to the vehicle non-tg mice. Analysis of microglial cell ramifications showed a significant increase in the vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice (F = 21.09, p < 0.001) (Fig. 6e,h) and treatment with Gabadur (p < 0.0001) or Neurodur (P < 0.0001) significantly reduced the microglial cell ramifications (Fig. 6e,h) to levels comparable to the vehicle non-tg mice.

Finally, we investigated the functional effects of the calpain inhibitors in the α-syn tg mice. Compared to the non-tg mice the vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice showed a 45% increase in total activity in the open field (F = 13.75, p = 0.0001) (Fig. 7a). Treatment with Gabadur or Neurodur ameliorated and normalized levels of activity to those similar to non-tg controls (Fig. 7a). Other analysis in the open field including lateral movement, rearing, and thigmotaxis did not show differences between non-tg and α-syn tg nor were there any changes with Gabadur (p = 0.0001) or Neurodur (p = 0.0004) (Fig. 7b–d). This suggests that these compounds normalize the hyperactivity in the α-syn tg and that no side effects, such as anxiety, were observed.

Discussion

The present study showed that similar to observations in PD/DLB patients, neurodegeneration is associated with increased calpain fragments that indirectly suggest increased activity. Moreover, in a model of synucleinopathy, CNS-penetrating calpain inhibitors reduced calpain, α-syn accumulation, and c-terminus truncation of α-syn, while ameliorating neurodegenerative pathology in the hippocampus. In vitro and in situ experiments have shown calpain cleaves α-syn, thereby affecting its metabolism and possibly leading to increased deposition19–21 and neurodegeneration. Therefore targeting calpain might be of benefit in patients with PD/DLB. In support of the possibility that the neuroprotective effects of Gabadur and Neurodur are related to their effects on calpain, we showed by immunoblot a reduction in the 78 kDa activated calpain band as well as decreased spectrin degradation. Moreover, we showed and suggested that the neuroprotective effects might be related to reductions in α-syn cleavage at the c-terminus with a concomitant increase in total soluble monomeric α-syn. However, it is worth noting that additional studies will be needed in the future to evaluate calpain activity with alternative assays and more extensive analysis of various proteolytic fragments will be needed. It is possible that blocking calpain and thus α-syn c-terminus truncation might be critical; however, a number of other substrates are cleaved by calpain in the CNS and might co-participate in the neuroprotective mechanisms of these calpain blocking compounds. These results are consistent with previous studies in acute and chemical models of PD. For example, administration of N-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) increases calpain-mediated proteolysis in nigral dopaminergic neurons in vivo15. Another indicator of the role of calpain in PD is that overexpression of calpastatin leads to a reduction in truncated as well as aggregated α-syn22. In 1-methyl-4-Phenylpyridinium ion (MPP+) treated granular neurons, calpain activation was increased by 74% as measured by SBDPs. Moreover, these studies indicate that this cleavage is mediated by calpains and that MPP+ prompted an increase in cdk5 expression, as well as the cleavage of p35-p25, in a time-dependent manner. Studies in rodent and cell culture models of PD suggest that treatment with calpain inhibitors (e.g., calpeptin, MDL-28170) can prevent neuronal death23,24. Inhibition of calpain using calpain inhibitor (MDL-28170) or adenovirus-mediated overexpression of the endogenous calpain inhibitor protein calpastatin, significantly attenuated MPTP-induced loss of nigral dopamine neurons15.

Moreover, we have recently shown that overexpression of the calpain-specific inhibitor calpastatin reduces α-syn processing, aggregation and synaptic impairment in A30P α-syn tg mice22. Together, these studies support the crucial role of calpains, particularly of calpain 1, in the pathogenesis of PD and other synucleinopathies, supporting a potential therapeutical role of calpain inhibition in PD/DLB. Interestingly, calpain inhibition has been shown to be neuroprotective in models of other neurological disorders such as Machado-Joseph disease25, and the superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) mutant (G93A) model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)26. It was also found to reduce neurodegeneration of retinal ganglion cells in experimental optic neuritis27. Along these lines, we found that despite some differences between them, Gabadur and Neurodur reduced calpain activity and α-syn accumulation in the neocortex and hippocampus. This was accompanied by reduced neurodegeneration and astrogliosis in the hippocampus and reduced microgliosis in the neocortex and hippocampus. This might be related to the concentration of the compounds in the CNS and time of exposure. Another possible explanation for this effect is that Gabadur might also exert its effects in the CNS via an α2-δ ligand of the voltage-gated calcium channel which is upregulated in response to various insults28,29, thus probably targeting leucyl-argininal calpain inhibitor to that site, unlike Neurodur which distributes everywhere in the CNS. Other limitations include the sample size and the lack of more direct evidence for calpain inhibition in a time and dose-dependent fashion in the CNS. Future studies will be needed to characterize in more detail the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic characteristics of Gabadur and Neurodur.

In summary, we showed that treatment with the calpain inhibitors reduced α-syn related pathology and improved activity performance of the α-syn tg mice. This suggests that targeting calpain might be a consideration for the treatment of PD/DLB.

Materials and Methods

Animals

A total of 38 mice were utilized for this experiment; 8 non-tg controls and 30 (6-month-old) mice over-expressing human wild-type α-syn under control of human Platelet-derived growth factor-β (h-PDGF-β) promoter. This model was chosen because we have shown in similar models increased calpain activity and α-syn cleavage resulting in aggregation and toxicity12. Furthermore, mice from this line develop α-syn aggregates distributed through neocortical and limbic brain regions similar to what has been described in DLB accompanied by hyperactivity and learning behavioral deficits30.

Calpain inhibitors

Two newly developed low molecular weight calpain inhibitors were tested. Gabadur: composed of the active end of the calpain inhibitor, leupeptin (Acetyl-L-leucyl-L-leucyl-L–argininal) and linked to stereochemically-modified Pregabalin. The latter is an analog of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) that acts as a carrier via a succinyl linker18,31. Its complete structure is [(3S,4S)-3 aminomethyl-4-amino-5-methyl hexanoic acid]-Suc-Leu Arg-aldehyde l18,31–33. Pregabalin is an α2-δ ligand of the voltage-gated calcium channel similar to GABA34–36. Gabadur utilizes Pregabalin to cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB) using L-type amino acid transporters and exerts its effect via α2-δ calcium channel subunit found on presynaptic sites of glutamatergic neurons28,37. A new study has further demonstrated the kinetics and ability to cross the BBB17. Neurodur is composed of cysteic acid (α-amino-β-sulfo-propionic acid) that shares structural similarities with taurine. Neurodur utilizes the Na+-dependent taurine transporters to cross the BBB as taurine31,33. Moreover, the carrier molecule taurine by itself has anti-inflammatory, calpain-inhibitory, and calpastatin upregulatory effects. This is an additional benefit of Neurodur38–40. The combination of leupeptin and taurine has synergistic effects and is very appealing as a therapeutic agent.

These combinations aim to rapidly target the drugs across the BBB as well as to the site of injury/pathology to inhibit calpain and other proteases, while potentially decreasing high levels of calcium and neurotransmitters, thereby conferring a dual therapeutic effect.

Treatments

Both Gabadur and Neurodur were prepared in phosphate buffer saline (PBS) 1X concentration solution. Animals were injected intraperitoneally (IP) with Gabadur, Neurodur, or PBS twice a day (9 AM and 4 PM) for 30 days. The following groups were included: a) non-tg control mice vehicle-treated (n = 8); PDGFβ- α-syn tg mice vehicle-treated (n = 10); PDGFβ- α-syn tg mice Gabadur (30 mg/kg) treated (n = 10) and PDGFβ- α-syn tg mice Neurodur (30 mg/kg) treated (n = 10).

Tissue processing

At the end of the 30-day treatment, the mice were sacrificed and the right hemibrains were snap-frozen and stored at −70 °C for biochemical analysis, while the left hemibrains were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for vibratome sectioning (50 µm) and neuropathological analysis. All animal procedures were approved by the UCSD Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee under protocol #S02221. All methods were performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations.

Immunoblot analysis of calpain and spectrin degradation

Calpain activity was measured indirectly by analyzing the shift ratio of total vs active calpain bands (80 vs 78 kDa) and by ascertaining the substrate degradation using western blot analysis for SBDPs as previously described18. Calpain was detected using an anti-calpain antibody (Dr. Naren Banik as a donation from Medical University of South Carolina), while α-spectrin was detected with anti-spectrin α chain (nonerythroid) monoclonal antibody (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) (1:1000 dilutions). Actin (anti-β-actin; 1:1000 dilution; Sigma) was used as an internal control and for normalization of the image analysis. We used 1:2000 dilutions of the alkaline phosphatase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody (Sigma, St. Louis, MO). Bands were visualized using 5-bromo-4-cholo-3- indoxyl-phosphate/nitroblue tetrazolium Benzamidine (BCIP, Kirkegaard and Perry Labs, Gaithersburg, MD). Proteins were quantified using Image-pro plus 4.5.1 software (Media Cybernetics, Inc., Silver Spring, MD) and the results were expressed in optical density units ± S.E.M.

Immunoblot analysis of α-syn in brain homogenates

As previously described, brains were homogenized and divided into cytosolic (soluble) and particulate (membrane) fractions41. Briefly, brain samples from the non-tg and tg mice treated with a vehicle, Gabadur or Neurodur (0.1 g) were homogenized in 0.7 ml of buffer phosphatase and protease inhibitor cocktails (Calbiochem). Samples were centrifuged at 5,000 × g for five minutes at room temperature. Supernatants were retained and placed into appropriate ultra-centrifuge tubes and centrifuged at 100,000 × g for one hour at 4 °C. This supernatant was collected, to serve as the cytosolic (soluble) fraction, and the pellets were resuspended in 0.2 ml of buffer and re-homogenized; this was the particulate (membrane) fraction. The BCA protein assay was used to determine the protein concentration of the samples.

For immunoblot analysis, 20 µg of protein from the cytosolic or particulate fractions per lane was loaded into 4–12% Bis-Tris SDS-PAGE gels and blotted onto polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes. For characterization of the effects of Neurodur and Gabadur on calpain c-terminus cleavage of -α-syn blots were probed with the SYN105 antibody16 (1:1000), while effects of total -α-syn were evaluated with the SYN-1 antibody (mouse monoclonal, 1:1000, BD Biosciences). Incubation with primary antibodies was followed by species-appropriate incubation with secondary antibodies tagged with horseradish peroxidase (1:5000, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA), visualization with enhanced chemiluminescence and analysis with a Versadoc XL imaging apparatus (BioRad, Hercules, CA). Analysis of β-actin (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) levels was used as a loading control.

Immunohistochemical and image analysis

The procedure for immunohistochemical analysis has been described elsewhere42. Briefly, blind-coded sagittal brain vibratome sections were treated at 4 °C for overnight with primary antibodies against α-syn (Syn-BD Biosciences)mouse monoclonal SYN105 antibody that was raised to detect the C-terminally truncated- α-syn (aa 116–120). The characteristics and specificity of these antibodies have been previously described16. This antibody was selected based on previous studies showing that α-syn has a c-terminus domain sensitive to cleavage by calpain and other proteases43–45, the c-terminus truncated α-syn is more prone to aggregate and accumulate in the membrane fraction16,46, is more toxic47 and facilitates trans-cellular propagation12. To determine the effects on neuronal, astroglial and microglial cells sections were incubated with primary antibodies against NeuN (Millipore, mouse monoclonal, 1:1000), GFAP (Millipore, mouse monoclonal, 1:1000) and Iba-1 (Abcam, goat polyclonal, 1:500) respectively. Following overnight incubation, the sections were incubated with biotinylated secondary antibodies and detected with avidin D-HRP (ABC Elite, Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA). To determine α-syn neuropathology (Syn-1 and SYN105) and astrogliosis (GFAP), the brain sections were imaged by Olympus BX41microscope. The levels of immunoreactivity were determined by optical density analysis using Image Quant 1.43 program (NIH). From each section, a total of 10 digital fields 1024 × 1024 pixels in the neocortex and hippocampus were analyzed. Levels of optical density were corrected to the background using sections stained in the absence of the primary antibody. The numbers of α-syn inclusion positive cells were determined per field (100 µm2). To estimate neuronal cell numbers briefly as previously described48, the numbers of NeuN-immunoreactive neurons in the hippocampus were estimated utilizing unbiased stereological methods. The CA3 region of the hippocampus was outlined using an Olympus BX51 microscope running StereoInvestigator 8.21.1 software (Micro-BrightField, Williston, VT) (grid sizes 150 × 150 μm and the counting frames were 30 × 30 μm). The average coefficient of error for each region was below 0.1. Sections were analyzed using a 100 × 1.4 PlanApo oil-immersion objective. The average mounted tissue thickness allowed for 2 μm top and bottom guard-zones and a 5 μm high disector. To analyze microglial cell morphology briefly as previously described49, sections labeled with Iba-1 were analyzed utilizing the Image-Pro Plus program (Media Cybernetics, Silver Spring, MD) (10 digital images 1024 × 1024 pixels per section) and analyzed in order to estimate the average number of microglial cells per unit area (100 μm2) and ramifications of Iba-1 positive microglia50.

Statistical analysis

All analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism (version 5.0) software.

All experiments were done blind-coded and in triplicate. Values in the figures are expressed as means ± SEM. To determine the statistical significance, values were compared using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Dunnett’s post-hoc test when comparing non-tg vehicle control to the α-syn tg groups, while the Tukey-Krammer posthoc test was used when comparing the α-syn tg vehicle vs the Gabadur or Neurodur groups as indicated in each figure legend. The differences were considered to be significant if the p-values were less than 0.05.

Figure 1

Immunoblot analysis of the effects of calpain inhibitors on α-syn tg mice. α-Syn tg mice were injected ip twice a day for 30 days with either Gabadur (1 mg/mouse; N = 10), Neurodur (1 mg/mouse; N = 10), or PBS vehicle control (N = 10) and compared to vehicle-treated non-tg mice (N = 8). ( ) Immunoblot and ( ) quantification of calpain levels. Calpain levels were significantly increased in vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice compared to vehicle-treated non-tg mice. Treatment with either Gabadur or Neurodur significantly reduced calpain protein levels in α-syn tg mice compared to vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice. ( ) Immunoblot and ( ) quantification of α-spectrin breakdown products (α-SBDPs). α-SBDPs levels were significantly increased in vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice compared to vehicle-treated non-tg mice. Treatment with either Gabadur or Neurodur significantly reduced α-SBDPs protein levels in α-syn tg mice compared to vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice. Statistical analysis was conducted using one-way ANOVA post hoc Dunnett’s test for comparison with vehicle-treated non- tg mice (*p < 0.05) and Tukey–Kramer test for comparison with vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice (#p < 0.05).

Figure 2

Effects of Gabadur and Neurodur on total α-syn levels in the neocortex and hippocampus of α-syn tg mice. α-Syn tg mice were injected ip twice a day for 30 days with either Gabadur (1 mg/mouse; N = 10), Neurodur (1 mg/mouse; N = 10), or PBS vehicle control (N = 10) and compared to vehicle-treated non-tg mice (N = 8). ( ) Representative photomicrographs and quantitation of total α-syn immunoreactivity in the ( ) neocortex and ( ) hippocampus. Immunoreactivity of total α-syn was significantly increased in vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice compared to vehicle-treated non-tg mice in both the neocortex and hippocampus. Treatment with either Gabadur or Neurodur significantly reduced total α-syn immunoreactivity in α-syn tg mice compared to vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice. Scale bar = 35 µm. Statistical analysis was conducted using one-way ANOVA post hoc Dunnett’s test for comparison with vehicle-treated non- tg mice (*p < 0.05) and Tukey–Kramer test for comparison with vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice (#p < 0.05).

Figure 3

Effects of Gabadur and Neurodur on c-terminus α-syn levels in the neocortex and hippocampus of α-syn tg mice. α-Syn tg mice were injected ip twice a day for 30 days with either Gabadur (1 mg/mouse; N = 10), Neurodur (1 mg/mouse; N = 10), or PBS vehicle control (N = 10) and compared to vehicle-treated non-tg mice (N = 8). ( ) Representative photomicrographs and quantitation of c-terminus α-syn immunoreactivity in the ( ) neocortex and ( ) hippocampus. Immunoreactivity of c-terminus α-syn was significantly increased in vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice compared to vehicle-treated non-tg mice in both the neocortex and hippocampus. Treatment with either Gabadur or Neurodur significantly reduced c-terminus α-syn immunoreactivity in α-syn tg mice compared to vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice. Scale bar = 35 µm. Statistical analysis was conducted using one-way ANOVA post hoc Dunnett’s test for comparison with vehicle-treated non- tg mice (*p < 0.05) and Tukey–Kramer test for comparison with vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice (#p < 0.05).

Figure 4

Immunoblot analysis of the effects of Gabadur and Neurodur on total and C-terminus α-syn protein levels in α-syn tg mice. α-Syn tg mice were injected ip twice a day for 30 days with either Gabadur (1 mg/mouse; N = 10), Neurodur (1 mg/mouse; N = 10), or PBS vehicle control (N = 10) and compared to vehicle-treated non-tg mice (N = 8). Hemibrains were homogenized and divided into cytosolic (soluble) and particulate (membrane) fractions and analyzed by immunoblot. ( ) Representative immunoblots of the cytosolic fraction analyzed for total and c-terminus α-syn protein levels. ( ) Quantitative analysis of total α-syn and c-terminus α-syn protein levels. Total α-syn protein levels were significantly increased in vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice compared to vehicle-treated non-tg mice. Treatment with either Gabadur or Neurodur increased total and reduced c-terminus α-syn protein levels in α-syn tg mice compared to vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice. ( ) Representative immunoblots of the particulate fraction analyzed for total and c-terminus α-syn protein levels. ( ) Quantitative analysis of total α-syn and c-terminus α-syn protein levels. Treatment with either Gabadur or Neurodur decreased total and c-terminus α-syn protein levels in α-syn tg mice compared to vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice. Statistical analysis was conducted using one-way ANOVA post hoc Dunnett’s test for comparison with vehicle-treated non- tg mice (*p < 0.05) and Tukey–Kramer test for comparison with vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice (#p < 0.05).

Figure 5

Effects of Gabadur and Neurodur on neurodegeneration (NeuN) in the neocortex and hippocampus of α-syn tg mice. α-Syn tg mice were injected ip twice a day for 30 days with either Gabadur (1 mg/mouse; N = 10), Neurodur (1 mg/mouse; N = 10), or PBS vehicle control (N = 10) and compared to vehicle-treated non-tg mice (N = 8). ( ) Representative photomicrographs and quantitation of NeuN-positive neurons in the ( ) neocortex and ( ) hippocampus. The number of NeuN-positive neurons was significantly reduced in vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice compared to vehicle-treated non-tg mice in both the neocortex and hippocampus. Treatment with either Gabadur or Neurodur significantly increased the number of NeuN-immunoreactive neurons in both the neocortex and hippocampus. Scale bar = 35 µm. Statistical analysis was conducted using one-way ANOVA post hoc Dunnett’s test for comparison with vehicle-treated non- tg mice (*p < 0.05) and Tukey–Kramer test for comparison with vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice (#p < 0.05).

Figure 6

Effects of Gabadur and Neurodur on astrogliosis and microgliosis in α-syn tg mice. α-Syn tg mice were injected ip twice a day for 30 days with either Gabadur (1 mg/mouse; N = 10), Neurodur (1 mg/mouse; N = 10), or PBS vehicle control (N = 10) and compared to vehicle-treated non-tg mice (N = 8). ( ) Representative photomicrographs and quantitation of GFAP-positive astrocytes in the ( ) neocortex and ( ) hippocampus. The number of GFAP-positive neurons was significantly increased in vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice compared to vehicle-treated non-tg mice in both the neocortex and hippocampus. Neither treatment with Gabadur nor Neurodur significantly affected the number of GFAP-immunoreactive astrocytes in either the neocortex or hippocampus compared to vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice. ( ) Representative photomicrographs and quantitation of Iba-1-positive microglia in the ( ) neocortex and ( ) hippocampus. The number of Iba-1-positive microglia was significantly increased in vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice compared to vehicle-treated non-tg mice in both the neocortex and hippocampus. Treatment with Gabadur or Neurodur significantly reduced the number of Iba-1-immunoreactive microglia in the neocortex and hippocampus. Scale bar = 35 µm. Statistical analysis was conducted using one-way ANOVA post hoc Dunnett’s test for comparison with vehicle-treated non- tg mice (*p < 0.05) and Tukey–Kramer test for comparison with vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice (#p < 0.05).

Figure 7

Effects of Gabadur and Neurodur on behavioral measures in α-syn tg mice. α-Syn tg mice were injected ip twice a day for 30 days with either Gabadur (1 mg/mouse; N = 10), Neurodur (1 mg/mouse; N = 10), or PBS vehicle control (N = 10) and compared to vehicle-treated non-tg mice (N = 8). Testing for ( ) total spontaneous locomotor activity, ( ) lateral activity, ( ) rearing, and ( ) thigmotaxis. Compared to vehicle-treated non-tg mice, vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice had a significant increase in total spontaneous activity. Gabadur and Neurodur significantly reduced total spontaneous locomotor compared to vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice. There were no significant differences between treatment groups in any of the other behavioral tests. Statistical analysis was conducted using one-way ANOVA post hoc Dunnett’s test for comparison with vehicle-treated non- tg mice (*p < 0.05) and Tukey–Kramer test for comparison with vehicle-treated α-syn tg mice (#p < 0.05).

