COVID‐19, obesity, and immune response 2 years after the pandemic: A timeline of scientific advances
Summary

In the 2 years since the COVID‐19 pandemic was officially declared, science has made considerable strides in understanding the disease's pathophysiology, pharmacological treatments, immune response, and vaccination, but there is still much room for further advances, especially in comprehending its relationship with obesity. Science has not yet described the mechanisms that explain how obesity is directly associated with a poor prognosis. This paper gathers all published studies over the past 2 years that have described immune response, obesity, and COVID‐19, a historical and chronological record for researchers and the general public alike. In summary, these studies describe how the cytokine/adipokine levels and inflammatory markers, such as the C‐reactive protein, are associated with a higher body mass index in COVID‐19‐positive patients, suggesting that the inflammatory background and immune dysregulation in individuals with obesity may be expressed in the results and that adiposity may influence the immune response. The timeline presented here is a compilation of the results of 2 years of scientific inquiry, describing how the science has progressed, the principal findings, and the challenges ahead regarding SARS‐CoV‐2, COVID‐19, and emerging variants, especially in patients with obesity.

INTRODUCTION

COVID‐19 is caused by SARS‐CoV‐2, an enveloped, single‐stranded, positive‐sense RNA virus that belongs to the Coronaviridae family. It may be asymptomatic or cause gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, and respiratory symptoms and may be potentially fatal. 1  Moreover, in the course of the pandemic, several variants have surfaced with varying characteristic symptoms, degrees of transmissibility, and mortality rates. 2 ,  3 ,  4  On December 31, 2019, the World Health Organization (WHO) noticed cases of viral “pneumonia of unknown origin” in the Chinese region of Wuhan. Shortly thereafter, the etiologic agent was found to be a coronavirus and its genome was sequenced. The disease name COVID‐19 was coined on February 11, 2020, and on March 11, the WHO declared COVID‐19 a pandemic due to the sharp rise in the number of cases and deaths worldwide. 5 ,  6  To date, COVID‐19 has caused more than 400 million cases and over 6 million deaths, currently ranking as the seventh most lethal virus in human history. 7  A global effort has been put forward to answer questions raised by the disease, including its origin, the impact on human and environmental health, and the best practices for treatment and prevention. As a result, exactly 2 years from the date of the first WHO report, a search using COVID‐19 as a keyword in PubMed retrieves 213,121 articles.

However, the immune response against COVID‐19 is not yet fully understood. Questions continue to puzzle immunologists, such as why some individuals are asymptomatic while others who seem to be otherwise healthy may have a severe case of the disease, how long immune memory can last after infection or vaccination, and how the immune system responds to the variants. Nevertheless, it is known that the immune system is involved in confronting the virus itself and the tissue damage that may occur. Briefly, the innate immune system's pathogen‐recognition receptors recognize RNA from the virus and trigger the inflammatory production of cytokines, such as interleukin 6 (IL‐6), tumour necrosis factor alpha, IL‐1, and type I and III interferons in particular. The adaptive immune response is involved when B and T lymphocytes are primed by viral antigens that bind to the B‐cell receptor and the T‐cell receptor, respectively. T cells can either help the development of the immune response and tissue repair by producing cytokines (CD4+ T cells) or by killing infected cells in an attempt to reduce the viral burden (CD8+ T cells), while B cells produce antibodies that endeavor to neutralize the infective potential of the virus. 8 ,  9  The adaptive immune response is dampened after removing the threat, but T and B memory cells specific to the antigen are generated. As the evidence shows, immunological memory can last for several months with humoral – assessed by anti‐spike (S), anti‐nucleocapsid (N), and neutralizing antibodies – and cellular components – particularly memory B and T cells – exhibiting different kinetics in the peripheral blood. 10 ,  11  Moreover, some form of memory may last years after infection, as suggested by data on antibodies in the context of SARS‐CoV infection. 12  Nevertheless, reinfection may occur. While there is still no consensus in the literature as to the criterion used to define reinfection, some studies have shown that it is arguably rare, although emerging variants are likely to play an important role in this phenomenon, as reinfections are usually arise from strains from those of the first infection. 13 ,  14 ,  15 ,  16  Importantly, vaccines seem to activate several pathways in the immune system, including the production of neutralizing and non‐neutralizing antibodies, induction of memory T and B cells, enhanced phagocytosis, and induction of type I and III interferons. 17  

An important feature of COVID‐19 is its higher rate of morbidity and mortality among individuals with comorbidities. 18  Some systematic reviews and meta‐analyses have observed that patients with obesity have a higher risk of being hospitalized with a more severe case of the disease and dying. 19 ,  20 ,  21  In addition to its elevated adipose tissue mass, obesity is characterized by low‐grade inflammation, or metaflammation, that affects the whole organism. 22  In this context, there is an imbalance in the production of proinflammatory and anti‐inflammatory molecules. The adipose tissue also alters the release of its adipokines, which further contributes to the immune imbalance in obesity and changes the energy metabolism circuitry. 22 ,  23  When combined with the metabolic burden imposed by obesity, along with a higher prevalence of pulmonary diseases, immune imbalance may be of prime importance to understanding why patients with obesity are especially vulnerable to COVID‐19.

The evidence of immune imbalance in severe COVID‐19 patients indicates a compromise in both the innate and adaptive immune systems. 24  Obesity is also significantly associated with COVID‐19 complications, yet it is not well known how the immune system is affected by the double burden of obesity and COVID‐19 and whether vaccine protection is less effective in individuals with obesity. This scoping review aimed to answer the following question: What immunological advances have been made in the context of obesity as a comorbidity of COVID‐19 2 years after the first report by the WHO?

METHODS

This scoping review was conducted in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta‐Analyses Extension for Scoping Reviews. To answer the question posed in section 1, articles of all types were eligible if indexed in common search databases for medical literature, published in the English language between December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2021, and contained potential reports on how the immune system might be altered in obesity as a comorbidity of COVID‐19 and/or how the response after vaccination might differ due to changes in the BMI. PubMed, Web of Science, and Embase were used as databases for searching and retrieving eligible articles. Two filters – title and abstract – were used to select the articles that could help answer the question. Additional articles were retrieved from the references of the studies included in the scoping review.

The keywords and Medical Subject Headings were divided into three groups to include the largest number of articles in the stipulated period: COVID‐19, obesity, and immune system (Table 1). The chosen databases were then searched within the three groups, complying with the analysis strategies of each database and applying the described filters. Finally, a new search was performed combining the three groups, with the articles containing one word from each group.

All articles were screened by two independent researchers for each database, then downloaded and annotated, and the full text was read. Included were articles published between December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2021, with their full text in English, and with their title and/or abstracts referencing at least one word from each of the three groups. The criteria for exclusion were reviews; letters to the editor; editorials; comments; articles that did not add new results to the research question; articles that did not explicitly refer to one or more groups of the search strategy in the title or abstract; articles in which obesity, bodyweight, or BMI was only a comorbidity occurring in a percentage of the patients and was not further correlated or analyzed as an immune aspect of COVID‐19; articles without an abstract; and articles from preprint servers. The results were then systematized following the immune system topics and synthesized accordingly.

RESULTS

A total of 525,735 articles referring COVID‐19 were published in the PubMed, Web of Science, and Embase databases. The search combining the three groups of keywords returned 1771 references: 596 from PubMed, 708 from Web of Science, and 467 from Embase. After filtering for duplicates from different databases, 917 references were further screened for eligibility. Out of these, 152 full texts were reviewed after excluding unrelated reviews, letters to the editor and comments (n = 556), articles that did not refer to one or more groups of keywords in their titles or abstracts (n = 127), articles in which obesity was described only as a comorbidity (n = 93), articles without an abstract (n = 4), and articles from preprint servers (n = 27). Eighty‐six articles were discarded because they failed to interrelate groups 1, 2, and 3 of the keywords. Finally, a total of 65 articles were included in this scoping review (Figure 1). During this period, two articles were published using an experimental model with obesity, four articles involving children, and 31 articles involving adults. Most of them evaluated hospitalized patients, many of whom were admitted to an intensive care unit, dead on arrival, or survivors without information on sex or race.

Several biomarkers have been proposed in an attempt to understand the impact of obesity on the severity of SARS‐COV‐2 infection (Figure 2). Individuals with underlying conditions that cause an immune‐compromised state, such as obesity, are considered vulnerable to this infection. The cells and molecules of the immune response are important determinants of viral infections, including coronaviruses, not only in the antiviral defense but also in the disease progression, severity, and clinical outcomes. SARS‐CoV‐2 infection can activate innate and adaptive immune systems and result in massive inflammatory responses later in the disease. Furthermore, these parameters are correlated with BMI status and adiposity (Figure 3).

Obesity, COVID‐19, and immune cells

A number of studies have reported that the hematological parameters in hospitalized COVID‐19 patients presented higher neutrophil counts, as well lower lymphocyte and eosinophil counts. 25 ,  26 ,  27 ,  28 ,  29 ,  30 ,  31 ,  32 ,  33 ,  34  Cell count of the innate immunity was altered in infected patients with a higher BMI in several studies. 29 ,  33 ,  34 ,  35 ,  36  The frequency of dendritic cells and monocytes was negatively correlated with BMI in aged COVID‐19 patients, 36  while natural killer (NK) cells decreased with BMI in young COVID‐19 patients. 36  In general, the neutrophil‐to‐lymphocyte ratio (NLR) is positively associated with adiposity and severity in COVID‐19‐positive patients. 25 ,  30 ,  31  In contrast, the lymphocyte count significantly dropped in patients with obesity as compared to those without obesity, and this percentage was significantly associated with death in patients with obesity in univariate and multivariate analyses. 34 ,  37  In addition, sedentary and children with obesity had a lower frequency of T regulatory cells associated with a higher frequency of Th1 cells. 38  The frequency of CD4+ cells in the subgroup of COVID‐19 patients with obesity was significantly decreased in the severe group as compared to the non‐severe group. 33  Moreover, the percentage of CD19+ cells was higher in overweight and patients with obesity as compared to normal‐weight patients. 33  It was observed that the lymphocyte‐to‐C‐reactive protein (CRP) ratio (LCR) and the lymphocyte‐to‐platelet ratio (LPR) is lower as well. 25  The lymphocyte and platelet counts are negatively correlated with BMI. 34 ,  39  The phenotypic profile of innate and adaptative cells is summarized in Table 2 and Figures 2 and 3.

Obesity, COVID‐19, and immunological molecules

The proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines, such as IL‐6, IL‐8, tumour necrosis factor (TNF), IL‐17, IL‐12, IL‐1, IP‐10, MCP‐1, and CCL5, were generally increased with higher BMI. 27 ,  28 ,  36 ,  40 ,  47 ,  48 ,  49 ,  50 ,  51 ,  52 ,  53 ,  54 ,  55 ,  56  Furthermore, high levels of IL‐10, an anti‐inflammatory cytokine, appear to be a hallmark of hyperinflammation during severe SARS‐CoV‐2 infection, 57 ,  58  and some studies included in this review observed that IL‐10 levels predict poor outcomes in COVID‐19 patients with obesity. 32 ,  51  In an attempt to reduce the high COVID‐19 mortality rates due to a cytokine storm, intensive research is underway examining the use of anti‐inflammatory drugs. Recent studies have supported the use of the IL‐6R inhibitor tocilizumab, 40  and the use of colchicine in COVID‐19 47  was associated with the reduction of multiple inflammatory mediators, including CRP, IL‐6, resistin, and vascular proteins in obesity. Visceral fat tissue is known for its proinflammatory effects, which are caused not only by the Angiotensin II system 59  but also by adipokines, such as leptin. 60 ,  61  Higher leptin levels have been demonstrated in SARS‐CoV‐2 ventilated patients and positively associated with high BMI. 62  During these past 2 years, several other inflammation biomarkers, including CRP, 26 ,  27 ,  28 ,  29 ,  31 ,  32 ,  35 ,  37 ,  40 ,  41 ,  44 ,  63  innate receptors, 52 ,  64  complement, 47 ,  65  and lipidic mediators 47  have been associated with COVID‐19 severity in patients with obesity (Table 3, Figures 2 and 3).

Additionally, it was found that patients with obesity have higher anti‐SARS‐CoV‐2 levels than lean patients 82 ,  84 ,  85 ,  86  (Figures 2 and 3). However, other studies showed that seroprevalence against SARS‐CoV‐2 did not differ with BMI or any biochemical parameters. 78 ,  83  

Obesity, COVID‐19, and vaccines

High vaccine effectiveness rates for the total population were reported, with slightly lower rates for the elderly and those suffering from hypertension, diabetes, or obesity, although BNT162b2 and mRNA‐1273 were reported to have a high efficacy (>89%) in the population with obesity. 87 ,  88  While vaccination does not eliminate the risk of hospitalization or death, the risks are significantly reduced, 89  and this result did not differ between the patients with obesity and the general population in one study. 87  After vaccination, the studies either showed no differences in antibody levels across BMI categories or slightly reduced antibody levels in patients with obesity. 89 ,  90 ,  91 ,  92 ,  93 ,  94  Furthermore, the vaccines were expected to perform well in terms of side effects in the population with obesity, although some minor side effects had different occurrence rates depending on the BMI. 95 ,  96  The vaccine efficacy, antibody response, and side effects after vaccination are summarized in Table 4.

DISCUSSION

The present scoping review analyzed the studies and their results comprising the association between COVID‐19, adiposity, and the branches of the immune system with a focus on answering the primary research question. Overall, adiposity was found to be related to an elevated population of monocytes and neutrophils with a concomitantly lower lymphocyte count in COVID‐19 patients as compared to patients with normal weight. Cytokine and adipokine levels, the CRP inflammatory marker, and antibodies were also observed to differ according to BMI in COVID‐19‐positive patients. Moreover, some pathways seem to be differentially regulated by obesity in the context of SARS‐CoV‐2 infection. Adipose tissue plays a role in the development of the immunological alteration, given the correlation of specific depots with immune markers. Furthermore, vaccines are safe and effective in the population with obesity, although one of the studies included in the present review reported slightly lower efficacy, and two others observed different frequency of side effects in the group with obesity as compared to normal‐weight individuals. These findings suggest that the inflammatory background and the immune dysregulation patients with obesity face may sum to those observed in COVID‐19, and adiposity may influence the immune course of the disease as well as the immune response to vaccines. Figures 4, 5, 6 summarize the immunological findings in the relationship between COVID‐19 and obesity 2 years after the first public announcement by the WHO.

Immune cells

Considering the findings on immune cells, the NLR was higher in women, who had higher BMI than men, and was related to the epicardial adipose tissue volume. 25 ,  31  However, based solely on the studies included in the present review, it is not possible to conclude that adiposity is directly associated with the NLR, as one of the included studies failed to observe any association between NLR and BMI, and another only pointed to an indirect relationship mediated by the length of hospital stay. 30 ,  34  A relevant insight, however, may come from the studies analyzing neutrophil and lymphocyte counts. While neutrophils seem to be positively related to BMI levels, 26 ,  29 ,  33 ,  34  lymphocytes are often lowered in patients with obesity. 26 ,  28 ,  29 ,  32 ,  35 ,  37 ,  39 ,  43  Importantly, the adiposity profile and specific adipose tissue depots, such as the epicardial adipose tissue, may be more accurately related to NLR, as they discriminate adiposity better than the BMI. 25  Indeed, it was observed that the NLR was associated with adiposity markers, particularly waist‐to‐height ratio and waist‐to‐hip ratio, although no difference was noted between patients with obesity and individuals without obesity. 97  Moreover, the NLR is associated with fatty liver disease and insulin resistance, which are common in patients with obesity and may aggravate COVID‐19. 98 ,  99  Thus, although BMI is probably not associated with higher NLR, adiposity levels probably are, and this is consistent with the data reporting worse outcomes in patients with obesity. Moreover, the higher NLR may be guided by the neutrophilia and lymphopenia these patients often present.

Neutrophilia, in particular, is a common feature of COVID‐19. It is related to the formation of neutrophil extracellular traps and possibly to the vascular and respiratory complications observed in the disease. 100 ,  101 ,  102 ,  103  Patients with obesity often present higher neutrophil counts than normal‐weight individuals, and adipose tissue is enriched in those cells. 99 ,  104 ,  105 ,  106  Importantly, neutrophils may play an important role in sustaining the inflammatory milieu in obesity, thus contributing to COVID‐19 severity as there is an upregulation of genes involved in neutrophil activation, such as myeloperoxidase (MPO) and neutrophil elastase (ELANE), in patients with obesity. 106  

Regarding the innate cell count, there are reports of monocytes/macrophages, eosinophils, basophils, NK, and dendritic cells in patients with obesity. Monocytes and macrophages appear to be associated with adiposity in patients with obesity and COVID‐19, with CD14+CXCR6+ cells positively correlated with the elevated BMI and CD68+ cells in the epicardial adipose tissue. 28  The phenotype of monocytes and macrophages is, arguably, of higher relevance than the absolute count since healthy, mild, and severe patients may not differ in the absolute count yet differ in morphological and expression profiles of these cells. 107 ,  108 ,  109  Nevertheless, the difference observed in monocytes may be due to obesity, as a higher cell count was observed in patients with obesity. Moreover, important differences were reported between patients with obesity and individuals without obesity in the classical, non‐classical, and intermediate compartments. 110 ,  111  In this regard, the positive correlation between CD14+CXCR6+ cells and BMI in young infected patients is illustrative, given that CXCR6 is a lung homing marker and cells bearing this marker are involved in cardiac inflammation and remodeling, thus suggesting that these cells play an important role in the disease. 112  

While eosinophils, total, and myeloid dendritic cells were negatively associated with BMI in infected patients, basophils and NK cells were positively associated with BMI and prolonged viral shedding, respectively. Although it could not be ascertained whether these findings are directly related to BMI or to the severity of the disease – given that few studies have considered patients with obesity –, the literature reports important changes in the blood count and phenotype of these cells in cases involving COVID‐19 and obesity. 113 ,  114 ,  115 ,  116  Importantly, these cells are susceptible to the cytokine milieu and direct effects of the virus, each having particular courses depending on disease severity and stage. As the studies reporting the association of these cells with obesity in COVID‐19 have a cross‐sectional design, it is possible that the changes observed reflect the disease stage when collection was performed. Eosinophils, for example, follow a particular pattern over time in the infection and in accordance with disease severity. 113  

The lymphocyte count was the main parameter assessed when considering the adaptive immunity. As mentioned, lymphopenia is a common finding in COVID‐19 cases. Following this trend, most studies reported a lower lymphocyte count in patients with obesity as compared to individuals without obesity. Interestingly, non‐infected individuals with obesity usually have a higher lymphocyte count than the normal‐weight controls. 117 ,  118  However, when it comes to disease severity, obesity is a well‐known risk factor. Indeed, severe patients seem to have a different adaptive immune response than patients with milder ones, with a lower lymphocyte count and a delayed and considerably weaker T cell response, which may explain the findings presented here. 9 ,  119  

The phenotypic characterization of lymphocytes was also performed in some studies and may be insightful for understanding disease pathogenesis and the immunological nuances of the interaction between obesity and COVID‐19. Lower CD4+ T cell count in the blood was associated with disease severity and prolonged viral shedding, whereas lower levels of physical activity and higher BMI were associated with lower frequency of CD4+ Treg cells. 33 ,  38 ,  42  These results corroborate the literature showing circulating CD4+ being affected by the infection and negatively associated with its severity and recovery. 120 ,  121  However, the mechanism for this effect, as well as for the exacerbated lymphopenia in patients with obesity, has not yet been clearly identified but may be the result of the viral attack on these cells, cell death following activation, or redistribution and localization to specific body compartments. 120  The result on Treg cells indicates that the higher BMI and the physical inactivity characteristic of the present pandemic are related to a higher inflammatory background, which could be of great importance for the clinical course of treatment in patients with obesity.

Despite these results, an important feature that was largely overlooked in the studies is the further characterization of the subsets of lymphocytes beyond CD4+ T cells. In general, there is an upregulation of both Th1 and Th17 profiles, including their characteristic cytokines, while Th2 and Treg profiles and their cytokines are downregulated in obesity. 122 ,  123 ,  124 ,  125  The Treg/Th17 ratio is decreased in obesity, and this is related to metabolic health. 126 ,  127  Severe COVID‐19, in turn, provokes dampened Th1 and Treg responses, while promoting the Th17 profile. 128 ,  129 ,  130  Similar to obesity, the IL‐17/IL‐10 ratio is increased in COVID‐19 cases, even in deceased patients, as compared to those who improved. 130  The cytokine milieu in these changes plays an important role. As will be discussed in the next section, IL‐5 participates in the event of cytokine storm, is often increased in obesity, and skews the polarization to a Th17 profile and away from the Treg profile. 131  Interestingly, TGF‐β, a cytokine that along with IL‐6 is important for the Th17 development, is more frequently expressed in the leukocytes of children with obesity and has an inverse relationship with IL‐10 in neutrophils of children with obesity. 132 ,  133  In this regard, it can be argued that the skewed pattern of CD4+ T cell subsets and their characteristic cytokines, which are already established in obesity, is further deepened in COVID‐19, which is a factor for greater severity and a higher mortality rate in patients facing the double burden of obesity and COVID‐19.

One study among the articles found in the present review reported a positive correlation between CD4+ central memory T cells and BMI in infected aged patients, while CD8+ cells secreting IFN‐γ correlated negatively with BMI in infected young patients. 36  Contrary to total CD4+ cells, which drop sharply in the infection, memory CD4+ cells are effectively formed in COVID‐19 patients and readily stimulated in vitro. 134  Like CD4+ cells, the CD8+ cell count is negatively associated with the severity of infection. 121  Thus, the negative correlation found between CD8+ cells secreting IFN‐γ and BMI may be reflective of a dampened antiviral response in individuals with obesity. However, it is puzzling that these correlations were observed only in aged or young individuals. Nonetheless, important differences had already been noted in the adaptive immune response when age was considered. 135  Still, the adipose tissue may possess an interesting therapeutic potential as the transfer of mesenchymal stromal cells from the adipose tissue of a healthy donor to severe patients resulted in a better outcome in most of the treated cases, accompanied by increased levels of B, CD4+, and CD8+ T cells. 41  From these data, it can be hypothesized that the normal‐weight, non‐inflamed adipose tissue acts as a reservoir of lymphocytes that counterbalance the deleterious effects of the infection, while the adipose tissue of patients with obesity does not possess this potential.

In addition to the lymphocyte count, adiposity in the form of epicardial adipose tissue volume was related to the lymphocyte‐to‐CRP (LCR) and platelet‐to‐lymphocyte ratios. The LCR was negatively correlated with the epicardial adipose tissue volume, while the PLR was positively correlated with the same parameter. Both findings have been associated with a poor clinical status and outcome. A lower LCR is associated with an unfavorable outcome and higher BMI. 136 ,  137  As discussed below, CRP is effectively elicited by IL‐6, which is often increased in obesity, thus explaining the lower ratio found in patients with obesity. Higher PLR is significantly associated with positive SARS‐CoV‐2 infection and severe disease, although this finding is not unanimous in the literature. 138 ,  139 ,  140  Importantly, coagulation disorders are concerning events in COVID‐19. Indeed, platelet count – thrombocytopenia, particularly – and coagulation biomarkers, such as D‐dimer, prothrombin time, and fibrin degradation products are related to disease severity and disseminated intravascular coagulation, and the mechanism behind them may be the inflammatory alterations in cell composition and cytokine milieu, particularly lymphopenia, that patients with obesity affected by COVID‐19 face. 141 ,  142 ,  143  Taken together, these results suggest that obesity exacerbates the inflammatory state in COVID‐19, and this is likely to play a major role in coagulatory disorders.

Immune molecules and pathways

The reports on immune molecules focused on the levels of cytokines/adipokines, CRP, and antibodies, but there were also important reports on immune receptors, complement proteins, lipid mediators, and the enzyme furin. The preference for the study of cytokines/adipokines and CRP levels may be related to the predictive value of these markers for complications in COVID‐19. 119 ,  144  The dysregulated levels of cytokines are of great concern due to the cytokine storm severe patients may face. 145  As in the case of other immune components reviewed here, it is not possible to present a clear scenario describing the involvement of these cytokines at the interface between obesity and COVID‐19 due to the plethora of confounding factors in each study. These factors include the fact that patients with obesity have a higher disease severity – and comparisons are often made with patients without obesity who did not have a similar disease course –, the definition of obesity used in each study, the co‐occurrence of other comorbidities that may mask the results, the limited metabolic characterization of patients with obesity, and the small sample size of many studies. The pandemic itself exacerbated various socioeconomical and biological factors – which are also important to account for in future analyses – that worsen the burden of obesity on the general population. 146  Nonetheless, a trend can be observed toward higher levels of inflammatory molecules and activation of inflammatory pathways in patients with obesity and COVID‐19.

The most commonly studied cytokine in the studies included in this review is interleukin 6 (IL‐6), with some studies reporting higher IL‐6 levels in patients with obesity. IL‐6 is usually elevated in obesity, with the adipose tissue being a major contributor to its circulating levels, as adipocytes and immune cells of the adipose tissue are important sources. 147 ,  148  In COVID‐19‐positive patients, IL‐6 is an important inflammatory cytokine elicited by the inflammatory stimulus and is one of the main cytokines in the event of a cytokine storm, being correlated to an unfavorable clinical outcome. 144 ,  145  The results of the IL‐6 receptor (IL‐6R) inhibitor tocilizumab on patients with obesity also highlight the importance of this cytokine as a key hotspot in the interaction between obesity and COVID‐19. 80  IL‐10 and TNF‐α are also common, with studies showing mixed results. While IL‐10, an anti‐inflammatory cytokine, is usually lower in patients with obesity, TNF‐α, a proinflammatory cytokine, shows the opposite trend. Surprisingly, in COVID‐19, IL‐10 is often elevated in severe patients and is an important cytokine in the event of a cytokine storm and may have a pathological role to play in the disease. 57 ,  58  These high levels of IL‐10 may be an attempt to reduce hyperinflammation and prevent tissue damage. However, the elevated production of IL‐10 and pro‐inflammatory cytokines, coupled with the observed association between higher IL‐10 levels and disease severity, suggests that IL‐10 is either failing to adequately suppress inflammation or acting in a way that deviates from its traditional role as an anti‐inflammatory molecule. 149  TNF‐α is also elevated and has been shown to have a strong predictive value for disease severity and death, being involved in tissue destruction and inflammatory cell activation in COVID‐19. 56 ,  150 ,  151  

Among the adipokines, leptin levels were elevated in infected patients, although it may be due to their higher BMI. 62  Lower leptin levels were observed in an animal model supplemented with an anti‐inflammatory and antioxidant substance, revealing that this molecule may be downregulated by anti‐inflammatory agents. 48  Due to its immunometabolic roles, leptin plays a major inflammatory role, triggering inflammatory responses. 152  In fact, one of the studies summarized in the present scoping review revealed that key inflammatory genes in the leptin pathway, SOCS3, STAT1, NFKB1, and IL1B, are upregulated in infected human epithelial cells. 66  Moreover, deceased patients with obesity as one of the comorbidities presented upregulation of genes in the leptin pathway in lung tissue samples. 74  It has been suggested that leptin may be a facilitator of acute pulmonary inflammation, given its immune role and increased angiotensin II, which promotes cardiorespiratory derangements. 62  Taken together, these results point to leptin, in addition to IL‐6, as an important inflammatory molecule produced by the adipose tissue that may be responsible for triggering detrimental effects in COVID‐19.

There is a trend in the studies denoting higher CRP levels in patients with obesity and a positive association with adiposity. CRP is often higher in patients with obesity as compared to normal‐weight controls and is associated with the low‐grade inflammation characteristic of obesity. 111 ,  132 ,  153  Blood CRP concentration in COVID‐19 cases is a common biomarker for adverse outcomes. 154  As discussed above, IL‐6 is a key player in COVID‐19 pathogenesis and is often elevated in infected patients with obesity as compared to those without obesity. This cytokine is a potent transcriptional stimulator of CRP in the liver. 155  Therefore, in the case of an infected patient with obesity, there may be a summation of both conditions for elevated CRP levels.

The reviewed studies reveal that obesity is positively associated with the expression of proinflammatory receptors and pathways, and this may be important in COVID‐19. In an animal model of metabolic syndrome, a higher expression of AT1 and MasR receptors was observed, which mediate anti‐inflammatory and cardioprotective actions, and the lower expression of the proinflammatory receptor AT2 after the administration of candersatan and captopril. 52  These results suggest that metabolically unhealthy individuals, including those with obesity, may suffer the cardiorespiratory and inflammatory consequences of the dysregulation of the renin‐angiotensin system. Indeed, patients with obesity present higher levels of the vasopressor molecule angiotensin II, which may exacerbate clotting formation, inflammation, and the cardiac and pulmonary damage seen in COVID‐19 cases. 156 ,  157  The higher NOD2 expression in patients with obesity likely indicates heightened surveillance to bacteria, as this receptor recognizes fragments of bacterial peptidoglycan, such as muramyl dipeptide, and this is relevant in complicated infections where bacteria are involved. 158  The higher expression of NFKB1 in the leptin pathway using expression data collected from non‐infected epithelial cells once again indicates that leptin, which is directly associated with adiposity, is an important inflammatory mediator. 66  

Signs of complement activation were suggested to have a relationship with adiposity. The patients with obesity taking colchicine had lower levels of C5a and C9 as compared to patients with obesity under placebo, and complement activation was observed in the endothelium of the subcutaneous adipose tissue associated with the presence of the virus. These data suggest that patients with obesity may be more prone to complement activation and that it is linked to subcutaneous manifestations of COVID‐19. SARS‐CoV‐2 is indeed capable of exacerbating complement activation via the classical and the lectin pathways, which is associated with disease severity due to endothelial damage and thrombi formation in multiple organs. 159 ,  160  

The data on antibodies are puzzling, as different studies have reported decreased, increased, or similar titers or seroprevalence between patients with and without obesity and COVID‐19. Several factors may be affecting these relationships, such as disease severity, study design, and specific antibodies analyzed. Disease severity, in particular, may drive a positive association between antibody levels and adiposity, as patients with obesity have a higher prevalence of worse clinical outcomes. For instance, hospitalized patients and children with multisystem inflammatory syndrome present higher IgG levels directed to the S protein as compared to those patients with a less severe disease course. 10 ,  161 ,  162  The data on antibodies directed to specific viral proteins and aimed at neutralizing antibodies, though more informative than total IgG, are also difficult to interpret. While anti‐Spike IgG was shown to have an inverse correlation with BMI, 63  anti‐nucleoprotein IgG showed a positive correlation with the same parameter only in young patients. These results indicate that some viral antigens present differing degrees of immunogenicity for the immune system, and this may be dependent on both adiposity and age. There is a report indicating higher levels of neutralizing antibodies in non‐severe patients with obesity as compared to non‐severe lean patients and higher total anti‐SARS‐CoV‐2 antibodies in patients with obesity. Another study, however, has shown a lower frequency of individuals with obesity with neutralizing antibodies and lower anti‐SARS‐CoV‐2 titers, while also reporting higher antibody levels directed to self‐molecules, 78  which may reflect the higher cell death that occurs in the adipose tissue of patients with obesity. These findings suggest that the higher antibody levels present in patients with obesity do not relate to disease protection but may mediate tissue damage with part of these antibodies directed to self‐tissues. Regardless of the discrepancies, it can be argued that individuals with obesity have a particular dynamic of B cell activation and humoral immune response, which has already been demonstrated in animal models of obesity. 163 ,  164  

Vaccines

Finally, vaccines are considered to be safe and effective in patients with obesity, based on data from vaccine studies in this population, although they may be marginally less effective for protection against infection and may induce different frequencies of side effects as compared to the normal‐weight population. Although these data have not yet been replicated, they suggest the immune system of patients with obesity responds to vaccines in specific ways. The lower efficacy for preventing infection in patients with obesity receiving the BNT162b2, in particular, may be reflected in other studies included in this review, which reported lower antibody levels in health‐care staff with obesity after receiving the first and second doses of the same vaccine. 88 ,  93 ,  94  However, one study observed no difference between individuals with and without obesity after receiving the vaccine, yet noted a higher risk of infection in those with obesity after receiving the first dose of BNT162b2, ChAdOx‐1 nCoV‐19, or mRNA‐1273. 87 ,  89 ,  90 ,  93 ,  94  Multiple immune mechanisms may be backing these results. The results of the present review clearly demonstrate that the innate and adaptive immune responses are altered in obesity. One study showed that BMI in COVID‐19 patients correlated with dendritic cells and central memory CD4+ T cells, two important cell types in the immune response following immunization. 36  Considering the antibody response specifically, individuals with obesity may present a unique humoral response with higher antibody titers but lower protection, as discussed above. Previous reports on the vaccination of patients with obesity have also observed mixed results, with BMI either negatively associated with efficacy and antibody levels or having no relationship with these parameters. 165 ,  166 ,  167  The response to vaccines is multifactorial, with variables such as age, genetic background, and vaccine technology likely affecting the outcome.

Some remarks need to be taken into consideration in light of the reviewed studies, the first one being the definition of obesity. In some studies, obesity or normal weight was defined by adiposity measures or different BMI setpoints, although most studies classified BMI categories according to the WHO criteria. BMI alone may not be the best tool to assess adiposity and, consequently, the association between obesity and COVID‐19. Most of the studies assessed obesity through BMI. However, this approach may shadow some important aspects of the relationship between obesity and COVID‐19. Although BMI serves as an indirect indicator of adiposity in a population, and the association between BMI and COVID‐19 severity appears to be a V‐shaped curve with severity increasing almost linearly in overweight and individuals with obesity (BMI > 25 kg/m2), 168  direct measures of adiposity and especially visceral adiposity, provide a more precise indicator of the association behind obesity and COVID‐19. 75 ,  169  Moreover, other variables, such as disease severity, age, and comorbidities are usually present and not controlled, which may explain the multiplicity of results found in certain topics. Another limitation is the transversal nature of most of the studies, which did not provide a clear picture of how patients with obesity evolve in immunological terms. Lastly, the phenotypes of innate or adaptive immune cells were often not considered when analyzed. Some cell types, such as monocytes and lymphocytes, can assume various forms that may possess contradictory actions that could not be captured given that only the cell count was reported.

Perspectives

Knowledge of COVID‐19 has advanced in various areas since the WHO declared it a pandemic, including those related to the pathogenesis of the disease and the immunopathology that accompanies it. This growing body of information has been crucial to confronting the pandemic, vaccines arguably being the pinnacle of applied knowledge associated with immunity against the virus. It has also extended to diseases that are important risk factors for COVID‐19 infection and severity, such as obesity.

Although important results have shed light on the relationship between obesity, COVID‐19, and the immune system, there are major gaps that still need to be addressed through future research. One of them is the course of infection in patients with obesity. The patients with obesity are well‐known to have a low‐grade inflammatory state, but it is not yet known how it affects the immune response against the virus. For example, in influenza A viruses, which include the H1N1 virus responsible for the 2009 pandemic, it was shown that important changes occur in the innate and adaptive immune systems, as well as longer viral shedding, both in humans with obesity and in animal models. 170  Another important indicator that should be addressed is how metabolically healthy patients with obesity deal with the disease as compared to metabolically unhealthy patients with obesity from an immune perspective, considering these patients have different inflammatory profiles. 171  Attention should also be paid to the definition of the sample, as there is a continuum ranging from patients without any metabolic compromise to those presenting all symptoms of the metabolic syndrome. 172  

The phenotypic characterization of cell populations may also be highly relevant to understanding how obesity affects and is affected by COVID‐19 infection. In addition to the cell count, obesity in both young and adult populations is associated with changes in the expression of cytokines, signaling the presence of molecules and receptors in the peripheral blood and adipose tissue. 111 ,  132 ,  133 ,  173  A broader characterization in the blood, adipose tissue, and airways could highlight several aspects of the disease in patients with obesity. Moreover, adipokines may be key players in the disease in the context of patients with obesity. Leptin has been explored in some studies, but there are other hormones, such as adiponectin, resistin, and visfatin, that are also highly relevant due to their metabolic and immune influences. Adipose tissue, specifically, may be a key tissue for immune regulation of the disease in both normal weight and obesity, given the increased ACE‐2 expression due to a high‐fat diet in this tissue and the role of adipocytes as producers of inflammatory molecules and antigen‐presenting cells. 174 ,  175  

As one of the key elements in the immune response elicited by vaccines, the antibody response was shown to be more persistent in patients with obesity. 82  

Cellular immunity in obesity, however, is not known despite its highly important function following vaccine administration. Although one report suggests a positive correlation between CD4+ central memory cells and BMI in aged patients, 36  it would be interesting to know whether memory B and T cells are effectively generated following the infection and, especially, after vaccination in patients with obesity. The effects of vaccination in the population with obesity also call for additional clarification. Although vaccines are highly effective and safe for this population, the studies included in this scoping review suggest a slightly discrepant post‐vaccination immune response in obesity. Longitudinal data on cellular and serologic variables would provide a better picture of this relationship.

In addition to vaccines, the efficacy of pharmacological treatments for COVID‐19 in the population with obesity warrants additional research. In this regard, the results for tocilizumab and colchicine have been promising. Both drugs have proven to be effective in reducing inflammation through various pathways: they reduced CRP levels in patients with obesity, while colchicine was also effective in reducing IL‐6, IL‐16, resistin, complement proteins C5a and C9, and the activity of the COX‐2 enzyme. 40 ,  47  

CONCLUDING REMARKS

More than six million people have died worldwide from COVID‐19, with many of these deaths in patients with comorbidities, such as obesity. Obesity is a major risk factor for disease severity and death and is associated with a low‐grade inflammatory state, which affects the entire body and all the immune branches. In the context of COVID‐19 immune response, obesity is associated with several differences as compared to normal‐weight individuals that signify a higher inflammatory background in the former (Figures 2 and 3). Despite the extensive timeline comprising studies made over the last 2 years, there are a number of considerations that have yet to be addressed relative to the COVID‐19 pandemic. It remains unclear whether these differences are due to discrepancies in the care received or to molecular mechanisms that predispose certain individuals to develop long‐lasting symptoms. The impact of the novel strains on the development of long COVID‐19 and which patients will be most affected by them will also require further study. It is not yet known whether this is more prevalent in individuals with obesity and whether the inflammatory state is involved. The exact mechanism also remains unknown.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST

The authors declare no conflict of interest exist.

FIGURE 1

Flow chart of the literature search showing the screening process and results

FIGURE 2

Main findings on the interaction between COVID‐19, obesity, and the immune system. Disease outcomes, pathways, cells, and molecules with higher levels or positively associated with obesity are shown in green, while disease outcomes, pathways, cells, and molecules with lower levels or negatively associated with obesity are shown in red. ARDS: acute respiratory distress syndrome; BMI: body mass index; CATi: cardiac adipose tissue; EAV: epicardial adipose tissue; ICU: intensive care unit; LT: T lymphocyte; T2DM: type 2 diabetes mellitus; MCP‐1: monocyte chemoattractant protein‐1

FIGURE 3

Correlations networks of immune response and the adipose tissue with COVID‐19. The continuous lines show positive correlations, and traced lines show negative correlations between immune cells and molecules and adiposity parameters or among themselves. The correlations were retrieved from the reviewed articles and are all statistically significant (p < 0.05) AD: adipocyte‐derived; BMI: body mass index; CCL: C‐C chemokine ligand; IL: interleukin; LT: T lymphocyte; TNF: tumor necrosis factor; MDA: malondialdehyde; aGMC: geometric mean antibody concentration

FIGURE 4

Timeline of the findings on the interaction among COVID‐19, obesity, and the immune system in 2019 and 2020. The results demonstrated were summarized in Tables 2, 3, 4. The date of each result and event is underlined and corresponds to the date of its first appearance in the databases

FIGURE 5

Timeline of the findings on the interaction among COVID‐19, obesity, and the immune system in the first semester of 2021. The results demonstrated were summarized in Tables 2, 3, 4. The date of each result and event is underlined and corresponds to the date of its first appearance in the databases

FIGURE 6

Timeline of the findings on the interaction among COVID‐19, obesity, and the immune system in the second semester of 2021. The results demonstrated were summarized in Tables 2, 3, 4. The date of each result and event is underlined and corresponds to the date of its first appearance in the databases

