The Role of MicroRNA Signature as Diagnostic Biomarkers in Different Clinical Stages of Colorectal Cancer

Abstract

Objective

 Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common cancers and a major cause of cancer-related death worldwide. The early diagnosis of colorectal tumors is one of the most important challenges in cancer management. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have provided new insight into CRC development and have been suggested as reliable and stable biomarkers for diagnosis and prognosis. The aim of this study was to analyze the differential expression of miRNAs at different stages of CRC searching for possible correlation with clinicopathological features to examine their potential value as diagnostic biomarkers. 

Materials and Methods

 In this case-control study, plasma and matched tissue samples were collected from 74 CRC patients at stage II-IV as well as blood samples from 32 healthy controls. After exhaustive study of the current literature, eight miRNAs including miR-200c, 20a, 21, 31,135b, 133b,145 and let-7g were selected. The expression level of the miRNAs was assayed by quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). Statistical analysis, including t test , Mann-Whitney U, Kruskall-Wallis tests and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve was applied, where needed. 

Results

 Significantly elevated levels of miR-21, miR-31, miR-20a, miR-135b, and decreased levels of miR- 200c, miR-145 and let-7 g were detected in both plasma and matched tissue samples compared to the healthy group (P<0.05). However, no significant differences were observed in the expression level of plasma and tissue miR-133b (P>0.05). ROC for tissue miRNAs showed an area under the ROC curve (AUC) of 0.98 and P<0.001 for miR-21, 0.91 and P<0.001 for miR-135b, 0.91 and P<0.001 for miR-31, and 0.92 and P<0.001 for miR-20a. 

Conclusion

Our results indicate that the expression levels of microRNAs are systematically altered in CRC tissue and plasma. In conclusion, detection of miR-21, miR-135b, miR-31 and miR-20a levels in the tissue might be helpful to illuminate the molecular mechanisms underlying CRC carcinogenesis and serve as tumor-associated biomarkers for diagnosis.

Introduction

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most commonly  diagnosed types of cancer in men and women,  worldwide. Each year, more than 1 million new cancer- related cases are diagnosed, causing about 600,000  deaths (1). Among Asian populations, both the incidence  and mortality rates of CRC are increasing rapidly (2, 3).  CRC is a complex disease, charactrized by anumber of  genetic alterations and dysregulated signaling pathways  (1). Since this malignancy is mainly asymptomatic and  often diagnosed at the late stage with poor prognosis,  a great emphasis is placed on early tumor detection to  decrease the mortality rate (4). 

Colonoscopy is currently the gold standard and has very  high sensitivity and specificity in detecting colorectal  lesions, but because of its invasive nature and other  limitations, is not considered as the best method of choice.  Therefore, there is an urgent need for identifying stable,  specific and reliable biomarkers to facilitate the early  detection of CRC (5). 

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), as well-known non-coding  RNAs, have been demonstrated to be involvedin cancer  development and progression. The major mechanisms  of actions of most miRNAs involves translational  inhibition and mRNA degradation, which is mediated  by complementary binding to target mRNAs (6, 7).  Studies have indicated that miRNAs can control  hundreds of target genes via their oncogenic or tumor- suppressive activities depend on the target (6).

Since their discovery, microRNAs have been found  to regulate cellular processes which have key roles  in different aspects of cancer biology, such as cell  proliferation, apoptosis and differentiation (6, 7).  Therefore, these molecules have recently achieved  remarkable success in cancer management through  their regulatory roles in gene expression and protein  translation (8). There is increasing evidences that  miRNAs are largely dysregulated in different types  of solid cancerous tissues and their tissue-specific  expression profiles have promising applications in  cancer diagnosis, prognosis and treatment (9).

Based on this background, identification of the  altered miRNAs expression profiles as well as their  association with tumorigenesis are important steps  in cancer management (9, 10). On the other hand,  it has been distinguished that the altered expression  of miRNAs in a range of malignant tissues could be  reflected in circulation, suggesting them as promising  diagnostic biomarkers (10-12). A number of studies  have also confirmed the potential value of circulating  miRNAs as diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers for  CRC (11, 12). However, to gain an insight into the  role of miRNAs in CRC carcinogenesis, identifying  their association with clinicopathological features is  especially helpful (13).

In this study, eight miRNAs (miR-21, miR-135b,  miR-133, miR-let7-g, miR-31, miR-20a, miR-200c  and miR-145) were particularly chosen based on  comprehensive review of the literature and other  previously published data on CRC. MiR-21, miR135b,  miR-20a and miR-31 have been suggested as  oncogenic regulators in CRC, whilst, let7-g, miR-145  and miR-133b act as tumor suppressors.

These miRNAs were selected for their potentials  as diagnostic biomarkers and probable biological  significance in CRC (10, 14, 15). However, it has been  reported that miR-200c could act as an oncogene or  tumor suppressor in CRC depending on TNM stage  (13, 15-17). The purpose of this study was to examine  the differential expression of CRC-associated miRNAs  in tissue and plasma from different stages of the  disease to evaluate their clinical value as diagnostic  biomarkers.

Materials and Methods

In this case-control study, a total of 74 blood samples  (39 with stage II, 30 with stage III and 5 with stage  IV of CRC) and a subset of 74 matched tumor tissues  were collected from CRC patients. Histopathological  features were confirmed by pathological analysis and  the patients were staged according to the tumor-node metastasis (TNM) staging system of the International  Union Against Cancer (16).

This study has been approved in Ethic Committee of Iran  University of Medical Sciences (Ethical code: IR.IUMS.  REC 1394.26649). Written and signed informed consent  forms were gathered from all the volunteers participating  in this study. Participation of individuals was voluntary  and all participants were aware of the project’s purpose.  The patients had received no chemotherapy. Also, all  participants stated they had received no treatment in  the two months prior to the study. In the healthy group,  32 blood samples were collected from subjects with no  current malignancy or infectious disease. The healthy  subjects were matched to the cancer patients, according  to age and gender.

Sample collection and preparation

The surgical tumor samples were microscopically  inspected by an oncologist, who obtained a biopsy from  a section representative of the colon or rectum tumor.  The tumor tissue specimens were placed directly in  RNALater (Thermo Fisher scientific, Germany) and  transferred to the molecular laboratory and stored  at -20°C until use. Peripheral blood was collected in  vacutainer liquid EDTA 6 ml blood collection tubes,  and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)  Cs and plasma fractions were separated by density  gradient separation. Then, the upper layer (plasma)  was stored in 2 ml DNase/RNase free microtubes and  frozen at -80°C until miRNA extraction.

miRNA extraction

The plasma (200 µl) and tumor tissue (5 mg) samples  were subjected to miRNA extraction. Frozen plasma  samples were thawed and miRNAs were extracted  using a miRNA extraction kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA,  USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Tissue miRNAs (tumor and the corresponding  normal tissues) were isolated by a modified TRIzol  protocol as explained previously (14). The quantity  and quality of the extracted RNA was evaluated  using spectrophotometry and gel electrophoresis,  respectively. 

cDNA synthesis

Total RNA (1 µg) was reverse transcribed into cDNA  using cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Ampliqon,  Denmark) as explained previously (16, 17). Briefly,  1 µg of RNA was mixed with 1 µl of random hexamer  primers and 1 µl M-MuLVreverse transcriptase (200 U/  µl). Nuclease-free diethyl pyrocarbonate (DEPC)-treated  water was added to bring the mixture up to a volume of 15  µl. Then, the mixture was incubated at 65°C for 5 minutes  in a 7500 thermocycler (ABI) and cDNA was synthesized  with the program of 5 minutes at 25°C, 60 minutes at  42°C, and 5 minutes at 70°C.

Bioinformatics study and miRNA selection

Eight miRNAs selected by virtue of being demonstrated  as colorectal cancer-associated miRNAs and established as  a tumor suppressors or an oncogenes in CRC. The miRNAs  involved in colon cancer, were selected from the Sanger  Center miRNA Registry at  . Furthermore, we used some miRNA  databases (miRDB, TargetScan, miRBase and miRTarBase)  to predict the biological targets of miRNAs and validate  microRNA-target interactions both in vitro and in vivo.

Quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain  reaction for detecting mature miRNAs 

The expression of a for ementioned miRNAs was  measured by a poly A quantitative reverse transcriptase  polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) technique using  specific oligonucleotide primers (14). All PCR reactions  for CRC and control samples were performed in duplicate  and the mean CT data was obtained using cycle threshold  settings. The relative expression levels of miRNAs in  tissue and plasma were normalized to that of RNU6B  asaninternal control. The normalization was completed by  using the equation: log  (2-ΔΔCt), in which ΔΔCt =Ct  Ct (18).

Statistical analysis 

At first, the normality of the data was assessed using  the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Data were analyzed  using the independent t test, when the distribution was  normal, and Mann-Whitney U test, when the distribution  was not normal. To evaluate the diagnostic value of the  miRNAs, receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curve  was completed. Level of significance for statistical tests  was 0.05. The SPSS software version 22 was used for the  analyses.

Results

Clinicopathological characteristics of the studied  colorectal cancer patients 

Clinicopathological features of the CRC patients have  been detailed. There was no evidence of further disease  complications in the participants. Conerning location of  the tumors, 47 (63.5%) patients had rectum tumors, and  27 (36.5%) located in the colon. Moreover, 39 participants  (52.7%) had stage II, 30 (40.5%) had stage III, while 5  (6.7%) had a stage IV CRC. The patients included 48 males  (64.86%) and 26 females (35.13%) with ages rangingfrom  29 to 84 years old (median age: 49.6 years). The clinical and  pathological characteristics have been described (Table 1).

Plasma miRNAs levels

The results demonstrated that all studied miRNAs (miR200c,  miR-145, miR-135b, miR-133b, miR-31, miR-21, and  miR-20a and let-7 g) were differentially expressed either  in plasma or tissue samples from CRC patients compared  to healthy controls. Based on the Kolmogorov-Smirnov  test, these miRNA values were not normally distributed  (P<0.05). Therefore, the Mann-Whitney U test was used  to compare the expression of miRNAs between the CRC  patients and controls. However, independent t test was  applied to compare the expression of miRNAs between  the CRC patients and controls. qPCR data indicated that  the expression levels of plasma miR-20a, miR-21, miR31,  miR-135b were significantly higher than those in the  healthy controls (P<0.05, Figes. 1, 2). By contrast, the  expression levels of miR-145, miR-let-7g and miR-200c  were significantly lower (P<0.05) in the plasma of CRC  patients than that of the healthy controls (P<0.05, Fig .3).

Expression of miRNAs in colon cancer tissues

Based on the qPCR data, a statistically significant  (P<0.001) up-regulation of miR-20a, miR-21, miR-31  and miR-135b was found in the CRC tissues compared  to normal adjacent mucosa. Conversely, the expression  levels of miR-200c, miR-145 and let-7g were signific  antly lower in tumor tissue compared to adjacent normal  tissues (P<0.001, Figes.2, 4). However, no significant  differences were found either in the expression level of  plasma or tissue miR-133b between CRC patients and  healthy controls (P>0.05).

The correlation of miRNA expression between  matched tissue and plasma samples

Investigation of miRNA expression levels in tissue  and matched plasma samples showed that the relative  trends of miRNA expression are similar in both tissue and  plasma samples. The correlation analysis of expression  of selected miRNAs expression showed aimportantcorrelation of miRNA expression patterns in the tissues  with those in the plasma, R2=0.831 (Fig .5). It suggested  that plasma miRNA patterns accurately reflect the  expression signature of their tissue counterparts. 

Clinicopathologic features of colorectal cancer and  miRNA expression

Further analysis wasperformed to examine whether  there was an association between miRNA expression  levels and different clinicopathologic features including  tumor stages, age, gender, tumor size, differentiation and  lymphovascular invasion (LVI) status. Characteristic  stage-dependent variation in the expression level of tissue  and plasma miRNAs were analyzed between various  stages (II, III and IV) of CRC. The results showed miR21,  miR-31, miR-20a, miR-135b were significantly  upregulated in CRC (tumor stages II, III, IV) compared to  normal colorectal tissues (P<0.05). In contrast, miR-145,  let-7g and miR-200c were significantly downregulated  in CRC (tumor stages II, III, IV) compared to normal  tissues (P<0.05). 

The plasma levels of miR-21, miR-31, miR-20a and miR135b  showed a significant rising with the higherstages of  malignancy (P<0.05). By contrast, miR-145, miR-let-7g  and miR-200c showed a significant decreasing trend with  the higher stages of malignancy (P<0.05). Additionally,  the plasma levels of let-7g showed a significant decrease  in stage III compared to healthy control (P<0.05).

The expression levels of miR-21, miR-31and miR135b  in CRC plasma samples were significantly  different between patients with stage II and III (P<0.05).  Further analysis revealed no remarkable correlations  between plasma and tissue levels of miRNAs and other  clinicopathological features such as tumor size, tumor  differentiation and LVI status (Figes.3, 4).

Evaluation of the diagnostic power of miRNAs

To confirm the diagnostic value of the miRNAs  signature, ROC curve analysis was performed for both the  plasma and tissue data. The test demonstrated significant  accuracy in discriminating CRC patients from healthy  individuals for tissue miR-135b, miR-31, miR-21 and  miR-20a. The calculating ROC AUC for tissue miRNAs  was 0.98 and P<0.001 for miR-21, 0.91 and P<0.001 for miR-135b, 0.91 and P<0.001 for miR-31, and 0.92 and P<0.001 for miR-20a, which was suggestive of high discriminatory power (Fig .5).

Discussion

CRC is one of the deadliest malignancies that is  frequently diagnosed at advanced stages with poor  prognosis (1, 2). Therefore, there is an urgent need for  finding stable and reliable biomarkers to facilitate early  detection of the disease and decrease mortality rates (5,  12). Micro RNAs (miRNAs), as a well-known group of  non-coding RNAs, have been revealed to play a vital  role in CRC carcinogenesis (7) . In addition, it has been  suggested that CRC-associated miRNAs might serve  as tissue-based biomarkers for cancer classification and  diagnosis (6, 9). The circulating cell-free miRNAs have  been regularly investigated in serum/plasma of cancer  patients and reported to bestable biomarkers in various  malignancies including, CRC (5, 11). Nevertheless,  various nucleic acids released from blood cells into serum during coagulation and the right spectrum of tumor- derived circulating miRNAs fluctuates in serum samples.  Since serum may potentially contain blood cell-derived  miRNAs (15), we postulated the plasma samples can  bemore reliable sources of tumor-derived circulating  miRNAs. 

Considering the oncogenic or suppressor roles designated  for different miRNAs in cancer development (6, 9), it is  valuable to identify CRC-related miRNA signatures to  expand our knowledge of their biological function. Here,  we investigated the pattern of plasma miRNAlevels as well  as matched tissue samples in CRC patients in comparison  with healthy individuals and analyzed the potential value  of these molecules as diagnostic biomarkers. In line with  this aim, eight miRNAs (miR-21, miR-135b, miR-133,  miR-let7-g, miR-31, miR-20a, miR-200c and miR-135b)  were selected by virtue of having been demonstrated to be  potential biomarkers for CRC (10, 13, 14).

The expression analysis demonstrated that all studied  miRNAs were differentially expressed in patients  compared to healthy controls. Our results indicated the  same altered expression pattern in both plasma and tissue  samples. We observed significantly elevated levels of  miR-21, miR-31, miR-20a and miR-135b and significantly  decreased levels of miR-145, miR-200c and miR-let-7g in  both plasma and matched tissue samples compared to the  healthy groups.

However, no significant differences were observed in the  expression level of miR-133b either in plasma or tissue,  between CRC patients and healthy controls. As well,  the supplementary analysis demonstrated a significant  correlation of miRNA expression levels in the CRC  tissues and those in the plasma, with R2=0.831. These  data illustrated that, the manner of miRNAs expression in  plasma is similar to their corresponding tissues.

A forementioned findings suggested that the plasma  miRNA expression pattern in CRC could reflect the  expression signature of the tumor tissue. It seems that,  the CRC tumor-derived miRNAs could be release into the  blood stream. Consistent with this, it has been confirmed  that the epithelial tumor-derived miRNAs potentially  enter into and can be detected in circulation. Furthermore,  we evaluated the correlation between expression levels  of the miRNAs and clinical features. The results clearly  demonstrated that miRNAs exhibited some changes in  their expression levels along with cancer development  and progression.

Our finding showed that, miR-21 is significantly  upregulated in both plasma and matched tissue of CRC  samples compared to healthy controls. Also, a ROC curve  (AUC) of 0.98 for tissue miR-21 was found. Further  analysis revealed that, the expression level of miR-21 was  significantly different between an earlier stage (II) versus  the late stages (stages III, IV). MiR-21, as an oncogenic miRNA (oncomiR) regulates a number of important indications of the tumor-progressing process.

Overexpression of miR-21 could enhance cell  proliferation trough targeting PTEN and PI3K,  whiledecreasing apoptosis via targeting BTG2, FasL and  FBXO11. In addition, miR-21 has been shown to affect  angiogenesis, metastasis, genetic instability and resistance  to chemotherapy in several solid tumors including in CRC  (19, 20). In agreement with our results, the expression  level of this miRNA has been reported to be associated  with clinical stage and survival of CRC patients (20-22).  Accordingly, a potential role of miR-21 in tumor growth  and progression of the malignancy, and as a diagnostic  biomarker was confirmed more than ever.

We also found that the expression of miR-135b both in  tumor tissue or plasma was significantly up-regulated in  comparison with that of healthy controls, which was in  agreement with earlier studies (13, 22). MiR-135b, as an  oncogenic regulator in CRC modulates cell proliferation,  apoptosis and chemoresistance through regulating key  tumor suppressor genes such as LATS1, LATS2 and APC  (22). A number of studies have witnessed a remarkable  upregulation of miR-135b in CRC tissues (13, 22) of  mouse or human tumors, suggesting it as a primary event  in CRC (8).

Based on our results and pervious findings, miR-135b  is believed to be involved in CRC development and  progression (13, 22). However, tissue miR-135b with a  specificity of 0.906 and a sensitivity of 0.973, and AUC  of 0.91 showed a higher value than plasma miR-135b for  cancer discrimination.

Nevertheless, one study from the Chinese population,  provided no evidences that circulating cell-free miR135b  could be considered as a biomarker for early CRC  detection (23). These inconsistent results may be due  to the different approaches in sampling. Recent studies  suggested that plasma, but not serum, is the sample  of choice in examining cell-free circulating miRNAs,  because miRNAs might be released from blood cells into  serum during the coagulation process changing the true  spectrum of circulating tumor-derived miRNAs (17). In  this study plasma samples were chosen as a more reliable  source of extracellular cancer-related miRNAs.

In the present study, the upregulation of miR-31 in  CRC tissue and plasma samples in comparison with  healthy subjects was revealed. In addition, we showed a  significant upregulation of miR-31 in all clinical stages  of CRC compared to healthy controls, which is supported  by other studies (13). Based on previous studies, miR-31  has been recognized as a potent cancer-related miRNA,  involved in carcinogenesis of CRC by targeting tumor  suppressor genes such as HIF-1a and CDKN2B (24,  25). This miRNA has also been demonstrated to act as  an oncomiR in human CRC, where its overexpression  is associated with cell proliferation, invasion and  metastasis (13, 26). Our analysis, in line with the above- mentioned studies, showed that tissue miR-31 with a  ROC AUC of 0.91 might serve as a potential diagnostic  biomarker for CRC.

MiR-20a, as an upregulated miRNA in CRC, has  been revealed to increase cell migration and metastasis  by suppressing Smad4 and E-cadherin expression (27,  28). MiR-20a has also been shown to induce CRC cell  proliferation trough suppression of the TGF-ß signaling  pathway and inhibition of the G1/S checkpoint (28). Our  results are consistent with the previous studies (27, 28)  showing a significant overexpression of miR-20a in CRC  plasma and tumor compared to the healthy group. We also  observed tissue miR-20a with a ROC AUC of 0.92 had a  stronger power than plasma miR-20a for cancer diagnosis.  Altogether, there was a positive association between high  plasma and tissue expression of miR-20a and advanced  clinical stages of CRC, suggesting a probable oncogenic  role for miR-20a in the pathogenesis of CRC.

miR-200c, as a well-known post-transcriptional  regulator in many cancer cell signaling pathways, is  involved in tumor proliferation, cell cycle control,  invasion, and metastasis (29, 30). Also, it has been  reported that miR-200c could act as an oncogene or  tumor suppressor in different types of cancers, or even at  different stages of a defined tumor (30). We observed a  significant downregulation of miR-200c in CRC samples  compared to the healthy group.

Our finding is not the first report of downregulation  of miR-200c in CRC (31). Several functional studies  have revealed that miR-200c inhibits epithelialmesenchymal  transition (EMT) and cancer cell migration  by downregulating ZEB1/2 and upregulating E-cadherins  (31, 32). More recently, miR-200c has been shown  to be downregulated at the invasive front of CRC  while upregulated in the metastasis status (31). One  rationalization for these findings may be the hyper- or  hypomethylation trend of miR-200c through sequential  steps of the tumor’s development (32). Notably, miR-200c  expression levels were significantly lower in advanced  stages (III and IV) than stage (II). These clinical findings  supported the results from some related functional studies  showing a downregulation of miR-200c in the initial  stages of the disease (33).

Let-7g, has been reported to target major oncogenes as  a potent suppressor. Oncogenes including RAS, HMGA2,  BCL2L1 and GAB2 that affect cell proliferation and  apoptosis pathways (34). The significant downregulation  of this molecule has been observed in numerous cancers,  including lung, liver, breast, gastric and colon cancer (34,  35). However, there are a few studies on the biological  role of let-7g in the CRC (36). Our results exhibited  significant reduced expression levels of let-7g in CRC  compared to normal samples signifying this miRNA may  act as a potential tumor-suppressor (37). Based on our  findings and other investigations, this miRNA seems to  be associated with clinical outcomes of colorectal cancer.

MiR-145 can function as a suppressor of cell proliferation and tumor metastasis through targeting multiple oncogenes such as MYC, Kras, IRS-1, SOX2,  MUC1, etc. (38, 39), and its expression level has been  shown in several cancer cell lines (40). A number of  previous studies reported a significantly reduced level  of miR-145 at the adenomatous and clinical stages of  colorectal neoplasm (21, 26). 

We found a significant reduction in the expression of  miR-145 in cancer patients in comparison with healthy  controls. Based on these findings, this miRNA may be  associated with clinical outcome of colorectal cancer.  Taken together, our results indicated that the expression  levels of miRNAs are systematically altered in CRC tissue  and plasma samples. Moreover, the aberrant regulations  of miRNAs are relatedto different clinical stages of  CRC. The predictable changes of miRNA signatures may  happen during tumorigenesis and may be representative  of CRC development. These evidences are helpful in  illuminating the molecular mechanisms underlying CRC  carcinogenesis. On the other hand, the combination of the  miRNAs-based biomarkers with other existing screening  tests could be useful for diagnostic and prognostic  accuracy as well as therapeutic planings. 

Conclusion

Our results supported the hypothesis that plasma  miRNAs expression pattern might reflect the expression  pattern of their matched tissues. Our findings suggested  that differential expression of miR-31, 20a and 135b  and 21 may be serve as potential biomarkers for CRC  detection.

Fig.1

The relative expression of miR-31, miR-200c, miR-20a, miR-135b,  miR-133b, miR-21, miR-145 and let-7g in tissue [74 colorectal cancer (CRC)  samples compared to 32 controls]. Lines in the middle show the mean  expression value.

Fig.2

The relative expression of miR-31, miR-200c, miR-20a, miR-135b,  miR-133b, miR-21, miR-145 and let-7g in plasma [74 colorectal cancer  (CRC) samples compared to 32 controls]. Lines in the middle show the  mean expression value.

Fig.3

Correlation of clinicopathologic features of colorectal cancer with the relative expression levels of miRNAs in plasma. A. Comparison of miRNA levels  in colorectal cancer (CRC) and healthy controls, B. Comparison of miRNA expression level in patients with different tumor stages, C. Comparison of miRNA  expression levels in different lymphovascular invasion (LVI) status, D. Comparison of miRNA expression levels in CRC according to age, E. Comparison of  miRNA levels in CRC with different tumor sizes, F. Comparison of miRNA expression levels in colon and rectal cancers, G. Comparison of miRNA expression  levels in patients with various tumor differentiation, and H. Comparison of miRNA expression levels in CRC based on patient’s gender.

Fig.4

Correlation of clinicopathological features of colorectal cancer (CRC) with the tissue expression level of miRNAs. A. Comparison of miRNA expression  levels in CRC and healthy controls, B. Comparison of miRNA expression levels in patients with various tumor stages, C. Comparison of miRNA expression  levels in CRC in different lymphovascular invasion (LVI) status, D. Comparison of miRNA expression level in CRC according to patient’s age, E. Comparisonof miRNA expression level in CRC with different tumorsizes, F. Comparison of miRNA expression levels in colon and rectal cancers, G. Comparison of miRNA  expression levels in patients with different tumor differentiation, and H. Comparison of miRNA expressionlevels in CRC based on patient’s gender.

Fig.5

Evaluation of diagnostic power of miRNAs. A. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis using plasma, B. Tissue miRNAs expressionlevels for distinguishing colorectal cancer (CRC) samples (74 cancer samplesand 32 healthy controls), and C. Pearson correlation scatter plot of miRNAexpression levels in colorectal cancer tissue and plasma.

