A systematic review and meta-analysis of the effects of educating parents on the benefits and schedules of childhood vaccinations in low and middle-income countries
ABSTRACT

Public health benefits of childhood vaccinations risk being derailed by low vaccination coverage in low and middle-income countries. One reason for the low coverage is poor parental knowledge of the importance of completing vaccination schedules. We therefore assessed the effects on childhood vaccination coverage, of educating parents and other persons assuming the parental role. We prospectively registered the systematic review, published the protocol, and used standard Cochrane methods to collect and synthesise the evidence. We found six eligible randomised trials with 4248 participants. Three trials assessed health-facility based education of mothers on the importance of completing vaccination schedules; immediately after birth and three months later (one study) or during the first vaccination visit (two studies). The other trials assessed community-based education, including information campaigns on the importance of vaccines using audiotaped presentations and leaflet distributions (one study); structured group discussions on benefits and costs of childhood vaccination and local action plans for improving vaccine uptake (one study); and home-based information sessions using graphic cards showing benefits and costs of childhood vaccinations and location of vaccination centres (one study). Combining the data shows that these interventions lead to substantial improvements in childhood vaccination coverage (relative increase 36%, 95% confidence interval 14% to 62%). There was no difference between the effects of community-based and facility-based education. Therefore, education in communities and health facilities on the importance of childhood vaccinations should be integrated into all vaccination programmes in low and middle-income countries; accompanied by robust monitoring of impacts and use of data for action.

Introduction

Vaccination is vital not only in averting infections, but also in mitigating the severity of infectious diseases and preventing some cancers.1,2 However, childhood vaccination coverage remains low in many low and middle-income countries, resulting in millions of vaccine-preventable child deaths each year2-4 The low vaccination coverage has been attributed to many reasons, including (but not limited to) parental knowledge and attitudes, and inadequate information and communication.4 In particular, poor understanding of the benefits of vaccines and vaccination schedules among parents is associated with low childhood vaccination coverage.5

Poor understanding of the vaccine benefits may be due to conflicting information parents receive about the importance and safety of vaccines.6 Therefore, it is important that parents and persons with parental roles are provided accurate information on the benefits of childhood vaccinations and adverse events following vaccination, so that they can make informed decisions regarding vaccination of their children.6-9 Active engagement and effective communication between the providers and recipients of vaccination services may be effective in improving vaccination coverage.10,11 We therefore conducted this systematic review to assess the effects of interventions for educating parents, compared to standard vaccination practices, on vaccination coverage in low and middle-income countries.

Methods

We registered this systematic review in the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews and published the protocol in a peer-reviewed journal.12,13 Studies eligible for inclusion in the review were randomised trials conducted in low or middle-income countries, as defined by the World Bank.14

We considered any intervention aimed at educating parents about the importance of childhood vaccinations, compared to standard vaccination practices. We defined parents as parents, legal guardians, or other persons assuming the parental role. Our outcome of interest was coverage with three doses of diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis containing vaccines (DTP3) or other vaccination status as reported by the trial authors.

We conducted a comprehensive search of peer-reviewed literature in multiple electronic databases; including PubMed, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), Web of Science, Cumulative Index of Nursing and Allied Health (CINAHL), and PDQ (Pretty Darn Quick) Evidence. We conducted the initial search in May 2015, with an update in June 2016. Appendix 1 shows the search strategy we used for the various electronic databases. In addition, we searched the WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform, Clinicaltrials.gov, and reference lists of relevant reviews.

The output from the May 2015 search was independently screened for potentially eligible studies by LA Lukusa (LAL) and NN Mbeye (NNM). The output from the June 2016 search was independently screened by VN Ndze (VNN) and CS Wiysonge (CSW). Full texts of potentially eligible studies were retrieved and the two researchers independently assessed them for eligibility against the study inclusion criteria. All potentially eligible studies were published in English. At each stage, the two respective researchers compared their results and resolved disagreements by discussion and consensus.

LAL and VNN extracted data from eligible studies in duplicate, using a pre-designed and pilot-tested data collection form); and compared their results and resolved discrepancies by discussion and consensus. The data extracted included study design and methods, country setting, participant characteristics, intervention characteristics, outcome measures, and outcome data. The two authors also independently assessed the risk of bias in each included study using the Cochrane Risk of Bias Tool.15 We assessed the risk of selection bias by considering the adequacy of random sequence generation and allocation concealment, and the risk of performance bias by considering blinding of participants and personnel. For the risk of detection bias we assessed the blinding of outcome assessors. We used completeness of outcome data to assess the risk of attrition bias, and the completeness of outcome reporting for the risk of reporting bias. For each domain, we classified the risk of bias as low if the criterion was adequately addressed, high if the criterion was not adequately addressed, and unclear if the information provided was not sufficient to make an informed judgement. We summarised the assessment and categorised each included study either as having a low or a high risk of bias. Any study that had a high risk of selection, detection or attrition bias was categorised as having a high risk of bias. All other studies were considered to have a low risk of bias.

We conducted data analyses using the Cochrane Review Manager software (http://ims.cochrane.org/RevMan). For each included study, we calculated the natural logarithm of the risk ratio (RR) and its standard error. We then expressed the result of each study as a RR with its 95% confidence interval (CI). We included data from two eligible cluster randomised trials after controlling for the design effect, using the intra-cluster correlation coefficient.15

We assessed statistical heterogeneity using the chi-squared test of homogeneity, with significance defined at the 10% alpha level. When there was significant statistical heterogeneity, we used the random effects model to pool study results and assessed the source of heterogeneity using subgroup analyses. We defined subgroups by type of intervention i.e. community-based versus facility-based education. In addition, we quantified heterogeneity using the Higgins' I-squared statistic.15

We assessed the certainty of the evidence for each outcome using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) approach.16

Results

Table 1. Characteristics of included studies.. The two literature searches generated a total of 3568 records, and removing duplicates resulted to 3537 records. After screening summaries of the records, we discarded 3527 clearly irrelevant records. Of the 10 potentially eligible studies, we included six in the review.17-21 The remaining four studies were excluded as they were not randomized trials.22-25 Fig. 1 shows the search and selection of studies for this review. Table 1 summarises the characteristics of the six included studies.   

Three studies assessed the effects of educating parents in communities, outside of health facilities.5,17,19 One study was conducted in Karachi, Pakistan, with 179 mothers in the education group and 178 in the “no-education” control group.5 The second study was conducted among 18 education and 14 control clusters in Lasbela district in Pakistan.17 The third study was undertaken in Uttar Pradesh, India, among 11 education and 10 control clusters.19 These studies assessed the vaccination status of children through vaccination cards,5 or by self-reports by parents.17,19

The other three studies assessed the effects of educating parents at health facilities.18,20,21 The first study was conducted in Kathmandu, Nepal, with 205 mothers in the education group and 198 mothers in the control group.18 The second study, undertaken in Karachi, Pakistan, had 375 mothers each in the education and control arms.20 The last study, also conducted in Karachi, Pakistan, randomised 376 mothers to receive education and 378 in the control “no education” arm.21 The studies assessed vaccination coverage through self-reports,18 or vaccination cards.20,21

One study reported including information of adverse events following vaccination in discussions with parents.17

Table 2. Summary of risk of bias in included studies.. All six studies had adequate randomisation sequence generation. One study had adequate allocation concealment,17 but it was unclear whether the other five had adequate allocation concealment.5,18-21 Outcome assessors were not aware of intervention allocations in four studies, but this was not the case in the remaining two.20,21 One study had a high proportion of participants lost to follow-up (21–29% in each arm),18 but the others had a minimal proportion of participants lost to follow-up. Based on pre-specified criteria, we judged three studies to have a high risk of bias.18,20,21,Table 2 shows a summary of the risk of bias in included studies.  

Three studies assessed the effects of educating caregivers in communities, outside of health facilities.5,17,19 Two of these studies reported DTP3 coverage5,17 and the third reported coverage with at least one childhood vaccine.19 The latter was a cluster-randomised trial conducted from May 2004 to May 2005 in Uttar Pradesh, India, in which Pandey and colleagues found the vaccination coverage in the intervention and control clusters to be 72% (386/536) and 46% (225/489) respectively.19 In the second cluster randomised trial, conducted in Lasbela district of Balochistan province of Pakistan, from the spring of 2005 to the spring of 2007, Andersson and colleagues reported 53% (283/535) DTP3 coverage in intervention clusters compared to 24% (103/422) in control clusters.17 The third study was an individually randomised trial conducted by Owais and colleagues from August 2008 to March 2009 in Karachi Pakistan.5 The investigators reported DTP3 coverage of 72% (129/179) in the intervention group and 52% (92/178) in the control group. Pooling the data from the studies shows that community-based education improves childhood vaccination coverage (three trials, 2339 participants: RR 1.61, 95% CI 1.19 to 2.18, I2 = 37%) (Fig. 3).

The three studies that assessed facility-based education reported DTP3 coverage.18,20,21 The coverage in the education compared to no-education arms was respectively 87% (179/205) and 85% (169/198) in the trial conducted by Bolam and colleagues from November 1994 to May 1996.in Kathmandu, Nepal; 65%(242/375) and 55% (205/375) in the trial conducted by Usman and colleagues from September 2003 to March 2004 in urban Karachi in Pakistan; and 60% (228/378) and 39% (149/378) in the trial conducted by Usman and colleagues from November 2005 to August 2006 in rural Karachi in Pakistan. Combining data from the studies shows that facility-based education improves vaccination coverage (three trials, 1909 participants: RR 1.24, 95% CI 1.01 to 1.53, I2 = 74%) (Figures 2 and 3).   

Table 3. GRADE Summary of findings for the effects of caregiver education on vaccination coverage.. Overall, the combined data show that education of parents improves vaccination coverage in low and middle-income countries (six trials; 4248 participants: RR 1.36, 95%CI 1.14 to 1.62; I2 = 65%) (Figs. 3). Table 3 shows our confidence in this evidence. Evidence from randomised trials is considered of high certainty in the GRADE framework; but we downgraded this to moderate because three of the six studies had a high risk of bias.  

Discussion

The target of the Global Vaccine Action Plan was to achieve 90% national coverage with all vaccines on national vaccination schedules in all 194 countries by 201526. However, only 129 (66%) countries achieved this coverage target by 2014.27 The ten countries with the largest numbers of un-immunised children are all low-income or lower-middle income countries.27 There is thus an urgent need for effective interventions that would ensure equitable uptake of existing vaccines by people in all communities around the world.26

In this systematic review, we have shown that caregiver education probably leads to substantial increases in childhood vaccination coverage. Although all six included trials were conducted in only three Asian countries (India, Nepal, and Pakistan), we have no reason to doubt the applicability of the evidence to other low and middle-income countries.

Only one study reported including information of adverse events following vaccination in the education sessions with parents.17 We are, therefore, uncertain of the extent to which the information of adverse events following vaccination impacted the decision making of parents. An adverse event following vaccination is defined as “any untoward medical occurrence which follows vaccination and which does not necessarily have a causal relationship with the usage of the vaccine. The adverse event may be any unfavourable or unintended sign, abnormal laboratory finding, symptom, or disease”.27 Such an adverse event maybe a vaccine product-related reaction, a reaction due to an error in administration, a reaction related to vaccine quality defect, a vaccination anxiety related reaction, or a coincidental event.27

Ours is the most comprehensive and up to date review of randomised trial evidence of the effects of caregiver education on childhood vaccination coverage. However, our findings are consistent with those of related systematic reviews.1,29-31 Community-based evidence based discussions aimed at knowledge translation to community members may prove to be more effective than conventional health education strategies. However, the setting and scale of the targeted population may influence these findings. Kaufman and colleagues previously reviewed face-to-face interventions for informing or educating parents about early childhood vaccination, and reported that these interventions may have little to no impact on vaccination status or knowledge and understanding of vaccination.29 The apparent difference in our conclusions may be because Kaufman and colleagues included studies from all country settings.28 Therefore, provision of accurate vaccine information in communities and health facilities should be integrated into all childhood vaccination programmes in low and middle-income countries; accompanied by robust monitoring of the impact and use of data for action.

Figure 1.

Flow chart showing study selection process.

Figure 2.

The effect of caregiver education on uptake of three doses of diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis containing vaccines among children.

Figure 3.

The effect of caregiver education on uptake of any vaccine among children.

