

Muscle biopsy tissue from a patient affected by the juvenile form of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (NCL) was studied immunohistochemically using antibodies to β-amyloid peptide and amyloid precursor protein. Positive reaction in muscle was specifically localized to autophagic vacuoles and blood vessel walls. Increased acid phosphatase reaction suggested enhanced lysosomal activity. We hypothesize that β-amyloid is deposited in NCL muscle by a lysosomal mechanism similar to that proposed in other disorders involving β-amyloid.

Introduction

Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCL) are autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorders of infancy or childhood with a global incidence of 1 in 12,500 live births. Common to all NCL forms is the presence of intralysosomal autofluorescent lipopigments in several tissues, including neurons, leukocytes, and endothelial cells. These deposits can have different ultrastructural features, varying from granular structures to fingerprint or curvilinear bodies [14]. The three main clinical forms of NCL are usually classified as infantile (Santavuori-Haltia disease), late infantile (Jansky-Bielschowsky disease), and juvenile (Spielmeyer-Vogt-Sjögren disease). The defective genes responsible for the infantile and juvenile NCL have been localized to chromosomes 1 [23] and 16 [18], respectively. More recently, the structural organization and sequence of the defective gene in classical late infantile NCL (CLN2) [22] and variant late-infantile NCL (CLN5) [21] have also been identified. Here we report on a patient affected by a juvenile form of NCL in whom the diagnosis was based on the clinical picture, and on skin and muscle biopsy findings. Since the composition of the lipopigments in brains in juvenile NCL patients is complex and includes such unusual components as β-amyloid [17] and amyloid precursor protein (APP) [25], we also investigated the biochemical composition of the autophagic vacuoles found in the muscle of our patient by immunohistochemistry with antibodies to β-amyloid filaments, APP, and ubiquitin. We also used antibodies against immunoglobulin lambda and kappa chains, against the neoantigens of the complement C5b-9 membrane attack complex (MAC) and against major histocompatibility complex class I molecules (MHC-I).

Case report

The patient was a 21-year-old male. The parents were healthy and nonconsanguineous. He was born after a normal pregnancy with an uneventful delivery. The neonatal period was unremarkable. Psychomotor development was normal up to age 6 years. While attending primary school, he started to complain of visual failure. The consulted ophthalmologist diagnosed a macular degeneration. A neurological examination at this age was normal. Visual loss gradually worsened, with another funduscopic examination at age 14 showing papillary atrophy. At age 17, the patient was admitted to a neurological clinic because of progressive gait and speech abnormalities associated with generalized seizures and mental retardation. Speech was monotonous. EEG showed generalized epileptiform discharges with abnormal background activity. Computed tomography (CT) showed dilatation of the fourth ventricle. Phenobarbital was administered leading to complete seizure control. The patient was brought to our attention at the age of 20 due to progressive deterioration of his clinical condition. Generalized seizures had become frequent, and administration of various anti-epileptic Detection of β-A4 amyloid and its precursor protein in the muscle of a patient with juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (Spielmeyer-Vogt-Sjögren) drugs could not completely control the seizures. Neurological examination showed severe mental retardation, diffuse muscle hypotonia, ataxic gait, visual loss and areflexia. The convulsive disorder was associated with myoclonus of the arms. EEG showed significant deterioration compared to the previous one performed at age 17. CT scan and magnetic resonance imaging showed generalized cerebral atrophy, and even more severe atrophy of the cerebellum. An important dilation of the fourth ventricle concomitant with enlarged cerebellar sulci was observed. Needle electromyography (EMG) showed neurogenic changes. Measurement of sensory nerve action potentials and conduction velocity was normal.

Visual studies showed abnormalities of the retinal pigment epithelium associated with electrophysiological (ERG) changes. Metabolic disorders able to cause myoclonus epilepsy and mental retardation were excluded by biochemical studies. A muscle biopsy was taken from the left vastus lateralis, with the overlying skin.

Materials and methods

Tissue

Muscle and skin biopsies were taken from the left vastus lateralis muscle. Prior to immunohistochemical study, the muscle biopsy sample was examined with standard histological staining techniques, including hematoxylin-eosin, trichrome Masson, periodic acid-Schiff (PAS), PAS following amylase treatment, Sudan, and enzyme histochemical techniques for succinate dehydrogenase (SDH), NADH-tetrazolium reductase (NADH-TR), menadione αglycerophosphate dehydrogenase, cytochrome c oxidase (COX), phosphorylase, and ATPase [6]. Histochemical methods were also used to detect acid phosphatase [2].

Control tissue was obtained from three patients without detectable muscle disease, three patients with sporadic inclusion body myositis (IBM), two patients with oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD), and two patients with polymyositis with severe structural muscle changes.

Immunocytochemistry

The muscle biopsy samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogencooled isopentane, and 7-µm-thick cryostat sections were cut. Nonspecific immunoglobulin binding sites in the tissue were blocked by incubation of the sections with 1:25 normal swine serum (Dakopatts, Glostrup, Denmark) in 0.05 M TRIS-buffered saline (TBS) pH 7.4, containing 1% bovine serum albumin fraction V (BSA). Sections were then incubated overnight with primary antibodies. The antibodies and dilutions used are listed in Table 1. Immunostaining was performed by the avidin-biotin-complex (ABC) or the peroxidase-antiperoxidase (PAP) [15] methods. Sections were photographed in a Reichert Polyvar optical microscope.

Negative controls consisted of preincubation with TBS and 0.1% BSA, incubation with non-immune mouse IgG, or omission of the primary antibody.

Autofluorescence

To evaluate autofluorescence, a frozen muscle section from the NCL patient and from an aged control were examined under a Zeiss Axioplan fluorescence microscope using an ultraviolet filter with excitation bandpasses of 340-380 nm.

Electron microscopy

For electron microscopic examination, muscle and skin tissue from our patient was fixed in 4% glutaraldehyde and postfixed in 2% osmium tetroxide, dehydrated in graded alcohols and embedded in Araldite (Fluka, Buchs, Switzerland). Ultrathin sections were stained with 2% uranyl acetate and lead citrate and observed in a Philips CM 10 electron microscope at 60 kV. A pellet of lymphocytes, isolated from our patient according to established techniques, was also studied by electron microscopy.

Molecular genetics

Using oligonucleotide primers BD1F and BD2R, we tested leukocyte total DNA for the presence of the 1.02-kb deletion in the CLN3 gene, as previously reported [26]. This genomic deletion has been determined to be a common mutation, encountered in about 70% of Batten disease chromosomes.

Results

Light microscopy

The muscle biopsy showed an overall myopathic aspect, with increased variation in fiber size and both atrophic and, more rarely, hypertrophic muscle fibers. Rare internalized nuclei were also observed. Regenerative muscle fibers or necrotic fibers undergoing phagocytosis were only rarely seen. A number of fibers appeared to be vacuolated (Fig. 1A). Some of these vacuoles were rimmed (Fig. 1B). The NADH-TR, menadione α-glycerophosphate dehydrogenase, SDH, COX, and ATPase preparations showed focal loss of activity (Fig. 1C, D). However, a two fiber pattern with slight type 1 predominance was retained. The PAS staining was positive in many vacuoles, though some vacuoles remained negative. Several vacuoles showed an increased Sudan reaction (Fig. 1E). There was strong acid phosphatase activity throughout the muscle tissue (Fig. 1F).

Immunohistochemistry

Positive immunostaining was found around and inside many vacuoles with antibodies against β-amyloid and APP (Fig. 2A, C). Endomysial capillaries and large perimysial blood vessels were also positive for these antibodies (Fig. 2B). The antibody against ubiquitin also stained some vacuoles. Anti-desmin antibody diffusely stained normal muscle fibers, representing the normal reactivity of the intermyofibrillar network, but a stronger reaction was found in vacuolated muscle fibers (Fig. 2D). No deposits of MAC, IgG or immunoglobulin light chains were observed. Normal immunostaining was found with the antibody against HLA-ABC.

Control tissue

In muscle biopsy specimens from patients affected by OPMD and IBM, the wall and sometimes the center of the rimmed vacuoles were immunolabeled with antibodies to APP and β-amyloid. With the antibody against HLA-ABC, all muscle fibers in muscle biopsies from patients with polymyositis showed a significant sarcolemmal immunostaining. Most of the necrotic fibers were immunolabeled by antibodies against immunoglobulin light chains. Few of them were MAC positive. This pattern of immunostaining was completely absent in muscle biopsy specimens from patients without detectable muscle dis-ease. No immunostaining was observed with omission of the primary antibody. After staining with non-immune mouse IgG, a weak stain was observed in the endomysium, but no other structures were labeled.

Autofluorescence

A considerable increase in autofluorescent material was observed in the sarcoplasm of the muscle fibers in our patient compared to aged control tissue.

Electron microscopy

Muscle

Numerous inclusions (1-1.5 µm) with curvilinear and rectilinear profiles were observed in the subsarcolemmal area and the intermyofibrillar network. Numerous vacuoles containing lamellar curvilinear and rectilinear aggregates were also observed (Fig. 3). These vacuoles also showed occasional myelin-like figures. Non-filamentous material was also seen. Numerous osmiophilic granular and amorphous inclusions were also found in the endomysial fibroblasts.

Skin

Numerous inclusions with curvilinear, rectilinear and fingerprint profiles were observed in smooth muscle cells (Fig. 4), eccrine sweat glands and Schwann cells.

Pellet of lymphocytes

Membrane-bound vacuoles containing inclusions with fingerprint profiles, were encountered in some lymphocytes.

Molecular genetics

Employing a PCR-derived method, we did not detect the common 1.02-kb CLN3 deletion in our patient.

Discussion

In the present study, we immunocytochemically examined a muscle biopsy specimen of a patient affected by a juvenile form of NCL. The diagnosis of NCL in our patient was made by clinical and morphological studies. In molecular genetic studies we did not detect the common 1.02kb CLN3 deletion in our patient [26]. These results, however, cannot rule out that other, less common CLN3 mutations could have produced this patient's neurodegenerative illness. The diagnosis of NCL is usually made by skin biopsy and, probably for this reason, muscle tissue has rarely been studied [5,10]. Many hypotheses of its pathogenesis have been advanced, but relatively few are still currently entertained [9]. The composition of the lipopigments characteristic of NCL is highly complex, but amongst others includes amyloid proteins. Amyloid is a generic term used to designate proteins of diverse origins that are often biochemically unrelated, but invariably form fibrillar deposits by aggregation of relatively small peptides in a characteristic cross-β conformation [7,8].

These amyloid peptides are usually formed by the enzymatic processing of a precursor protein (amyloidogenic protein). The nature of the precursor protein may vary, from immunoglobulin light chains [8] through various serum proteins [3,12] to APP [16]. We have found no evidence that immunoglobulin light chains were involved in this case. On the other hand, β-amyloid has been previously demonstrated in storage pigments in neurons of NCL patients [17]. In that study, β-amyloid was ultrastructurally immunolocalized to curvilinear and fingerprint profiles in affected neurons. However, these authors did not study any muscle tissue. In our present study of NCL muscle we were able to show β-amyloid and APP immunoreactivity in autophagic vacuoles and blood vessel walls, which corresponded ultrastructurally to lipopigment inclusions with curvilinear and rectilinear profiles.

β-Amyloid has previously been described in other diseases: Alzheimer's disease (AD), where it forms the core of senile plaques; and several muscle disorders, including OPMD [24] and IBM [1,19,24], where it is specifically associated with rimmed vacuoles. These data are confirmed in this study. The rimmed vacuoles have been also shown to be positive for the lysosomal proteases cathepsin B and D [24], which suggests a lysosomal involvement in the processing of β-amyloid in these disorders. Lysosomal processing of β-amyloid has also been hypoth- esized to play a role in AD neurodegeneration [4,11,13]. Furthermore, the strong acid phosphatase reactivity observed in the muscle of our NCL patient suggests a high lysosomal activity. Taken together, these results suggest that β-amyloid and APP deposition in NCL muscle may be determined by lysosomal activity, as seems to be the case for other muscle and neurological diseases involving β-amyloid and APP. Defective lysosomal processing of βamyloid and other proteins may be an important factor in lipofuscinogenesis in NCL, as already postulated for AD [4,11,13] and aging [20]. Thus, altered regulation of APP processing in the lysosomal system could also represent an aspect of the pathogenesis of NCL. Further study will be needed to elucidate this hypothesis.

Acknowledgements

We thank Roberta Salvestroni for excellent technical work. We also thank Marie Louise Basso for editing the manuscript.

Fig. 22Fig. 2 Cryostat sections of muscle stained with antibodies to β-A4 A showing positive staining in two vacuoles (arrows) and B in perimysial blood vessel walls; C APP (22C11) showing granular immunoreactivity in a vacuole; D desmin, showing stronger reaction in vacuolated muscle fibers (APP amyloid precursor protein). A × 312; B, C × 324; D × 220

Fig. 33Fig. 3 Electron microscopy of NCL muscle biopsy specimen. Mixed curvilinear and rectilinear lamellar profiles within an intermyofibrillar vacuole. × 61 500

Fig. 4 A4Fig. 4 A Electron microscopy of NCL skin biopsy specimen. Arteriolar smooth muscle cells displaying two membrane-bound pleomorphic inclusions (arrows) with fingerprints. B Higher magnification of the typical fingerprint profiles. A × 10 875; B × 61 500

Table 11Antibodies used in this study (pAb polyclonal antibody, mAb monoclonal antibody, APP amyloid precursor protein, MAC membrane attack complex, Ig immunoglobulin)AntibodyDilutionClonality SourceUbiquitin1/200pAbDakopattsβ-A4 amyloid1/500pAbProf. BeyreutherAPP 22C111/30mAbBoehringer MannheimDesmin1/100mAbDakopattsHLA-ABC1/100mAbDakopattsMAC1/100mAbDakopattsIgG1/200mAbDakopattsIg λ chain Ig κ chain1/100 1/200mAb mAbDakopatts DakopattsFig. 1 Cryostat sections of NCL muscle biopsy stained with hematoxylin-eosin A, trichrome Masson B, NADH-TR B, ATPase 10,4 D; Sudan E, acid phosphatase F (NCL neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis). A-F × 190

