Dermatomyositis with the features of inclusion body myositis associated with carcinoma of the bladder

Inclusion body myositis (IBM) is a unique category of inflammatory myopathy. It is characterized histologically by the presence of muscle fibres with rimmed vacuoles and abnormal intracellular accumulations of proteins. We report here a 62-year-old patient with bladder carcinoma, where the signs of IBM overlapped with clinical features of dermatomyositis (DM). A combination of cutaneous changes typical for DM with histological and other features of IBM is exceedingly rare, and has not been previously addressed in dermatological literature. To the best of our knowledge this is also the first description of the association of DM/IBM with internal malignancy.

body myositis (IBM) are three distinct categories of inflammatory myopathy. Polymyositis and IBM usually present as a myopathy only. 1 In contrast, distinctive cutaneous changes are characteristic for DM. Inclusion body myositis can be further differentiated histologically from other inflammatory myopathies by the presence of muscle fibres with rimmed vacuoles and abnormal intracellular accumulations of proteins. 2 Inflammatory myopathies are traditionally closely associated with internal malignancy: malignancy is seven times more frequent in DM patients than in the general population. Roughly 25% of patients with DM have, have had, or will develop an internal malignancy, most commonly of the lung, ovary, breast or stomach. 3,4 However, only a few cases of IBM associated with malignancy have been reported. 5 We describe here the case where the signs of DM with overlapping features of IBM developed in a patient with bladder carcinoma. To the best of our knowledge this is the first description of the association of DM/IBM with internal malignancy.

Case report

A 62-year-old white man presented in February 1998 with a 1-month history of progressively worsening rash, muscle pain, weakness and lethargy, causing him to stop his occupation as a house painter. The rash started on his neck and spread to involve his face, shoulders and arms. The rash was very pruritic and caused him much discomfort. The patient also reported gross haematuria and a 20 pound weight loss over the past year.

Medical history was significant for alcohol and tobacco abuse and positive rapid plasma reagin (RPR) test at 1 : 4 and antinuclear antibody (ANA) test at 1 : 80 within the past 2 months. Prior to the rash he was on no medications.

Physical examination revealed widespread erythema affecting the face, shoulders, chest, back, abdomen and anterior hips. The rash was of purplish colour with fine papular lesions and mild desquamation. It was especially prominent on the upper chest (V-sign), (Fig. 1) and lower back. There were also a few excoriations, with haemorrhagic crusts. His face was significantly swollen, with periorbital oedema, and erythema (Fig. 2). The patient also had some difficulty arising from a sitting position and had bilateral upper and lower extremity weakness graded at 4/5. Deep tendon reflexes were intact.

Laboratory tests, which included a full blood count; serum chemistries; erythrocyte sedimentation rate; RPR; ANA; rheumatoid factor; antihistone antibody; lactic dehydrogenase; creatine phosphokinase (CPK); aldolase; coagulation profile; anti-dsDNA; thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH); and C3 complement gave normal results. The serum C4 complement level of 42 (normal 12±36 kg) and antismooth muscle antibody titre of , 1 : 40 (normal , 1 : 20) were slightly positive. Urinalysis showed only a few leucocytes and red blood cells and was otherwise normal; however, the urine culture grew Enterobacter aerogenes.

A 6-mm punch biopsy of skin from the anterior chest showed epidermal atrophy with focal vacuolar alteration and a thickened basement membrane. There was hyaluronic acid deposition in the dermis, as well as superficial and deep perivascular and interstitial chronic inflammatory infiltrate mostly of mononuclear cells with occasional neutrophils and eosinophils compatible with systemic lupus erythematosus or DM (Fig. 3). Direct immunofluorescence was negative for IgG, IgM, IgA, C3 and fibrin deposition.

A biopsy of the right deltoid muscle revealed myofibre degeneration and atrophy, increased interstitial collagen, and endomysial inflammatory infiltrate in the paraffin-embedded tissue (Fig. 4a). Histological preparations of frozen sections showed variations in fibre size, with some apparent fibre splitting, and myofibre degeneration with occasional ghost fibres. Many muscle fibres were vacuolated with peripherally placed rimmed vacuoles suggestive of inclusion body myositis (Fig. 4b). Anti-ubiquitin staining showed punctate sarcoplasmic immunolabelling of some muscle fibres, although did not reveal convincing staining of the fibres with rimmed vacuoles (Fig. 4c).

The patient responded to triamcinolone 0´1% ointment BID with a significant improvement of the oedema but only mild improvement of the erythema. Overall, the lesions remained essentially as severe as seen on initial examination.

Urology service was consulted about the patient's haematuria and weight loss. An intravenous pyelogram and cystoscopy were performed and showed a large tumour in the patient's urinary bladder. A transurethral resection of the tumour was performed and showed a high-grade transitional cell carcinoma of  the bladder with muscle invasion. A therapeutic radical cystoprostatectomy with ileal conduit was performed on 23 March 1998. After resection, the histology of the tumour was found to be poorly differentiated, with some areas having a sarcomatoid appearance and differentiation towards adenocarcinoma. The cancer extended through the muscle wall of the urinary bladder into the perivesical adipose tissue and one pelvic lymph node contained tumour as well.

In the first few days following removal of his bladder carcinoma, the patient's skin improved with decreased erythema on the trunk and extremities. His strength also improved. However, 1 week later, the rash had progressively worsened with increased erythema on the face, trunk and extremities, and a positive Gottron's sign.

On 12 May 1998, the patient was admitted to receive 6 weeks of pelvic irradiation. At this time, his skin had an erythematous, scaly, dry rash involving his scalp, neck, shoulders, arms, abdomen and back stopping just above his knees. Two weeks into therapy, a whole body bone scan revealed widespread bone metastases. The  Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjd/article/141/5/926/6686908 by University Of Illinois Library user on 10 March 2023 patient's treatment plan was changed from curative to palliative and a request for hospice care was made. The patient was discharged from the hospital on 8 June 1998 and died at home a few days later.

Discussion

The patient described here presents several interesting points to be commented on.

First, there is an overlap between the apparent clinical features of DM and those characteristic for IBM. Indeed, the erythematous purplish rash typical for DM, with periorbital oedema were accompanied in our patient with proximal as well as distal muscle weakness, and normal creatine phosphokinase, all suggestive for IBM. Moreover our patient was also in an IBM-appropriate sex and age group, which is known to have a male predominance and affect people after age 50. 6,7 Although clinical features that help to distinguish IBM from other inflammatory myopathies have been outlined, 2 atypical clinical presentation is not unusual for this disease, and confirmation of the diagnosis of IBM requires a muscle biopsy. 8±10 A diagnosis of definite IBM is made if a muscle biopsy shows invasion of the fibres by mononuclear cells, vacuolated muscle fibres, and intracellular amyloid/ubiquitin deposits or 15±18 nm tubulofilaments. If the patient presents with the suggestive clinical features, but the muscle biopsy shows only inflammation without other pathological features of IBM such as tubulofilaments or amyloid deposits, then a diagnosis of possible IBM can be given. 2 The muscle biopsy obtained from our patient has demonstrated at least two of three aforementioned diagnostic criteria, namely mononuclear cell invasion of non-necrotic muscle fibres, and subsarcolemmal rimmed vacuoles. It failed though to show the presence of ubiquitin inside the vacuoles which would have been the most conclusive evidence for IBM. 11 The ubiquitin sarcoplasmic granular staining of muscle fibres found in our patient was probably of a non-specific nature. 12 All these findings together allowed us to conclude that DM in our patient had features of possible IBM.

A combination of cutaneous changes typical for DM with histological and other features of IBM has not been previously addressed in dermatological literature. A few cases when IBM was accompanied by DM-like skin changes have been described elsewhere, 13,14 as well as three cases when IBM developed later in life in patients with childhood DM. 15 Despite that the lack of associated skin changes is still considered one of the clinical characteristics that distinguished IBM from other forms of idiopathic inflammatory myopathy. 2,7 Second, our case is unique, not only because of the extreme rarity of DM/IBM association, but because of the concurrent diagnosis of transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder in this patient. Other rare cases of DM with IBM features have never previously been associated with internal malignancy. Moreover, although both DM and polymyositis have been shown to be associated with a higher frequency of malignancy, the causal association of IBM with malignancy remains undetermined. 11 A total of 11 cases of patients diagnosed with IBM and a malignancy have been reported. 5 Only one of these was diagnosed with transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder. In that case the amelioration of symptoms in a close relationship to the removal of the bladder tumour, led the authors to suggest that that might have been the pathogenetic mechanism for the IBM. 5 We are unable to be as conclusive in the case of our patient, because of the aggressiveness of the metastatic malignancy. Despite this some improvement in his DM did occur shortly after the removal of the bladder tumour. This findings, along with his normal serum creatine kinase (suggestive for associated cancer in DM patients), 16 led us to consider the possibility that our patient's cancer was causally related to the DM/IBM. Therefore, we report here what we believe is the first case of DM with the features of IBM with a concurrent diagnosis of transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder. Even though a precise association between IBM and malignancy remains to be found, it is possible that in our case there was a pathogenetic association between the cancer and this rare form of inflammatory myopathy.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Alina F.Jukkola, MD and Robert E.Mrak, MD, PhD, for their valuable help in the interpretation of the pathological findings.

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. Dermatomyositis with the features of inclusion body myositis. (a) Erythematous rash on the upper chest and neck (V sign). (b) Excoriated, crusted lesions on the purplish erythematous background on the left shoulder.

Figure 2 .2Figure 2. Dermatomyositis with the features of inclusion body myositis. Erythema, and periorbital oedema on the patient's face.

Figure 3 .3Figure 3. Skin biopsy from the anterior chest shows epidermal atrophy, focal vacuolar alteration and a thickened basement membrane. Dermis shows superficial chronic inflammatory infiltrate of mononuclear cells with admixture of neutrophils and eosinophils. (haematoxylin±eosin; original magnification Â 100).

Figure 4 .4Figure 4. Features of the inclusion body myositis in dermatomyositis patient. (a) Paraffin-embedded section from the right deltoid muscle showing increased interstitial collagen and endomysial inflammatory infiltrate (haematoxylin±eosin, original magnification, Â 200). (b) Frozen section from the same specimen demonstrating muscle fibres with subsarcolemmal rimmed vacuoles and myofibre degeneration (haematoxylin±eosin, original magnification, Â 200). (c) Ubiquitin immunolabelling of the muscle biopsy shows punctate myocytic cytoplasmic staining, probably of non-specific nature (ubiquitin immunostain; original magnification Â 400).

