Prion protein expression in mammalian lenses

Purpose. Aging and oxidative stress resulting from overexpression of Alzheimer precursor protein (βAPP) have been studied as important factors contributing to the major agerelated (sporadic), and minor (hereditary) forms of Alzheimer's disease (AD), and muscle inclusion body myositis, (IBM). AD and prion proteins accumulate in plaques linked with AD and scrapie diseases, and in rimmed vacuoles of IBM. Soluble β-amyloid (Aβ) fibrillar forms are now thought to play a critical role in and outside of cells by producing oxidative stress. In lens, βAPP and Aβ increase in cultured lenses exposed to oxidative stress, and in areas of lens fiber cell degeneration in thiamine (vitamin B1) deprived mice, a classic model of systemic oxidative stress. The purpose of the present study is to extend our studies of amyloid disease-related protein expression in mammalian lenses.

Methods. Western blot, immunohistochemical detection, and RT-PCR methods were used to identify and quantitate prion protein expression in human, monkey, and guinea pig lenses.

Results. We demonstrate for the first time that prion protein gene expression increases with oxidative stress in cultured human lens epithelial cells. In addition, we detected greater prion protein gene expression in fiber cells than epithelial cells in vivo. This is consistent with increases in prion protein expression demonstrated in myoblasts and neuronal cells induced to differentiate. Our initial investigations of prion protein in human lens cataracts identified increased prion protein immunoreactivity in regions of lens fiber cell degeneration.

Conclusions. The present data indicate that prion protein expression increases during lens development, and is sub-stantially increased in cultured human lens epithelial cells exposed to oxidative stress. We also provide evidence that prion protein immunoreactivity can be increased in regions of fiber cell disorganization. These data suggest a potential role for prion protein as a marker for some types of lens pathology, and in the mechanism of oxidative stress-related lens degeneration.

Introduction

Prion protein is linked with neurodegenerative diseases that include Creutzfeld-Jacob (CJD) and scrapie disease. 1,2 Prion protein is also found in Alzheimer's disease (AD) plaques 3,4 suggesting that an overlap exists between these amyloid diseases in brain. 4,5 Genetic evidence of linkage between AD and prion protein disease in brain comes from the analysis of an AD family pedigree carrying the H163R presenilin 1 mutation that produces early-onset AD. 5 Affected individuals in this pedigree have features of familial AD and CJD where increased β-amyloid (Aβ) and prion proteins are detected in brain plaques. Prion protein and AD proteins are linked in age-related muscle degenerative disease as well. These proteins accumulate in the characteristic rimmed vacuoles in major sporadic (s-IBM), and minor hereditary (h-IBM) forms of inclusion body myositis in muscle. [6][7][8][9][10][11][12] s-IBM is the most prevalent muscle disease starting at age 50 or greater. Increased Alzheimer precursor protein (βAPP) expression contributes to aging and oxidative stress that play key roles in the sporadic and hereditary forms of IBM and AD. [9][10][11][12] Oxidative effects of AD proteins are key to the proposed mechanism of Alzheimer pathophysiology. Ionic and oxidative stress produced by soluble and insoluble amyloid fibrillar forms that can act from within cells are thought to be critical to the mechanism of AD pathophysiology. [13][14][15] This leads to inappropriate expression and distribution of proteins that include the prion protein in muscle and brain degenerative disease.

Normal mammalian lens development involves epithelial cells migrating from the anterior surface to the equatorial margin, where they exit the cell cycle and greatly elongate into fiber cells. During this process, inner lens fiber cells lose all cellular organelles and degrade their DNA. The result is a tightly packed avascular tissue with little protein turnover that must remain transparent for decades under conditions of chronic oxidative stress in many species. [16][17][18][19] These features underscore the great oxidative stress burden faced by the ocular lens, particularly as it relates to aging. 18,19 Previously, we reported increased βAPP and Aβ in lenses in organ culture exposed to UV radiation and hydrogen peroxide. 20 We also observed increased Alzheimer's disease-related protein expression in a classic model of in vivo systemic oxidative stress, thiamine (vitamin B1) deprivation (TD). 21 In that model, we demonstrated lens fiber cell degeneration with co-localized accumulations of βAPP, Aβ and presenilin in the lenses of mice subjected to acute TD. Experimental TD was originally used to demonstrate neurodegeneration with accompanying accumulations of AD proteins in mice and rats. 22,23 The results obtained using lens organ culture and in vivo systemic oxidative stress models suggest that cellular mechanisms that lead to lens pathophysiology and cataract formation may be similar to the mechanisms involved in producing age-related and hereditary forms of AD and IBM disease.

In the present study, we extend our findings on amyloid proteins in lens by examining guinea pig, monkey and human lenses for prion protein mRNA and protein expression. We provide data demonstrating that prion protein expression is greater in lens fiber cells than epithelial cells. Prion protein expression was also significantly increased in cultured human lens epithelial cells exposed to oxidative stress. We also provide evidence that prion protein accumulation can occur in cataractous human lenses where lens fiber cell histopathology is evident. Our data suggest a potential role for prion protein as a marker of lens pathology and will provide a basis for future studies on the mechanism of cataractogenesis.

Materials and methods

RNA isolation

Total RNA was isolated from whole lenses taken from euthanized animals as described elsewhere. 24 In some cases the epithelial cell layer was separated from the fiber cell mass before RNA extraction. Human lenses came from the National Disease Research Interchange (Philadelphia, PA). For immunohistochemical examination, lenses were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in pH 7.4 Dulbecco's phosphate buffered saline (PBS) for eight hrs, embedded in paraffin, and sectioned. 21,25 Cell culture experiments For cell culture experiments, human lens epithelial cells: SRA 01-04 (gift of V. Reddy, Univ. Michigan) were grown in Dulbecco's Modified Eagles Medium (DMEM) (Gibco/ BRL Life Technologies, Gaithersburg, MD) and supplemented with 20% fetal calf serum (Gibco/BRL) and 0.05mg/ml gentamycin (Gibco/BRL) in a 5% CO 2 , 37 o C incubator. 24 The cells were grown until they reached 95% confluency, and were then washed with DMEM without supplements. The cell cultures were then placed in DMEM with 200µM hydrogen peroxide final concentration or an equivalent volume of water added and incubated under 5% CO 2 for three hours. The cells were then washed twice with PBS (Gibco/BRL) and harvested by lysis with RNA extraction solution (guanidinium isothiocyanate) (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA). The number of attached viable cells did not change during the three hour incubation as determined by trypan blue exclusion. 24 The RNA was purified using an RNA isolation kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA), followed by DNase treatment, and the integrity of the RNA was evaluated by agarose gel electrophoresis.

Reverse transcriptase dependent PCR (RT-PCR)

To determine the relative levels of expression of prion protein mRNA in treated and untreated cultured epithelial cells or lens tissue samples, we performed RT-PCR reactions using 300 ng of total RNA per reaction as described elsewhere. 24 The One Step RT-PCR system and protocol (Gibco/ BRL) was used to generate cDNAs and to amplify the prion protein cDNA products. The primer set used in experiments shown in Figure 1 corresponds to a region of bovine prion protein exon one and a region of exon two common to many mammalian species: (sense: 5' CCTCCAGTCGCTG-CCAGTCGCTGACAGCCGC 3'), (anti-sense: 5' CATG-GCACTTCCCAGCATGTAGCCGCCAAGGCC 3'). Primers used in Figure 2 were from human prion protein se- quence (sense: 5'-CAGCCTCATGGTGGTGGCTGG-3'), (anti-sense: 5' TAGTAACGGTCCTCATAGTCA 3'). Oligonucleotide primers for detection of human prion protein mRNA (Fig. 3) contained the following human prion protein sequences (sense: 5' GGCTGCTGGATGCTGGTTCTC 3'), (anti-sense: 5' ACCGTGTGCTGCTTGATTGTG 3'). In addition, RT-PCR was also carried out with a set of GAPDH-specific gene primers (see ref. 26 for primer sequences) for amplification of the GAPDH transcript as an internal standard. 26 PCR products were examined using agarose gel electrophoresis and DNA molecular weight standards (100bp ladder, Gibco/BRL) to determine the approximate molecular weights of amplified products. Finally, PCR products were subjected to nucleotide sequence determination and BLAST search (National Center for Biotechnology Transfer, National Library of Medicine, Bethesda, MD) to confirm the identity of amplified products. Multiple primers that assayed different portions of the prion protein transcripts served as controls, and the cDNA products identified by nucleotide sequence analysis confirmed molecular weight estimations from agarose gels. Determination of relative transcript levels was made using a flatbed PC-computer assisted scanner and 'NIHimage' software.

Immunological detection of prion protein

Western blot analyses of total proteins from clear human lenses were carried out using standard methods. A purified IgG mononclonal antibody preparation (clone 3F4) (Senetek, St. Louis MO) was used together with a horseradish peroxidase indirect immunochemical detection kit (Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA) to visualize immune complexes. For analysis of prion protein expression in clear and cataractous lenses, histological sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin, or alternatively were processed for immunohistochemical detection of prion protein. Sections were probed with the 3F4 primary antibody (1:2000) and subsequently probed with biotinylated goat anti-mouse antisera (1:2000) (Vector Labs) followed by fluorescein linked avidin (Vector Labs) for examination using fluorescence microscopy. A monoclonal antibody that recognizes SV-40 T antigen (1:2000) (Oncogene) was used as a control. Anti-MIP26 polyclonal antibody (1:2000) served as a positive control that produces a contrasting staining pattern. This antibody preparation was used with red fluorescent-tagged avidin for double-staining experiments. This permitted us to photograph brightfield, fluorescein, and rhodamine fluorescent views of the same field of lens fiber cells. Secondary antibodies and fluorescent tagged avidin preparations were used according to the specifications of the manufacturer (Vector Labs). Standard Zeiss brand fluorescein and rhodamine fluorescence microscopy filter cubes were used.

Results

Prion protein is expressed in mammalian lenses

We detected prion protein mRNA in samples purified from guinea pig and rhesus monkey lenses using reverse transcriptase dependent PCR (RT-PCR). The amplified cDNAs shown in Figure 1 demonstrate that cDNAs of expected molecular weights (550bp) were produced from both guinea pig and monkey lens RNAs. The oligonucleotide amplification primers used in these experiments are derived from an upstream non-coding exon in the bovine prion protein sequence, and from a downstream protein-coding region present in all mammalian species listed in the Genbank database. As a control, we also amplified a region of GAPDH from lens RNA samples purified from each species and again obtained similar levels of an amplified product of expected molecular weight (~600bp).

To confirm the identity and molecular weights of the amplified cDNA products, the nucleotide sequences of these products were determined. The sequences matched those in the database for the monkey prion protein gene. The nucleotide sequence obtained for the guinea pig product exhibited a high degree of sequence identity with the known human prion protein sequence. In similar experiments, a second set of RT-PCR amplification primers derived from prion protein coding regions produced amplified cDNA products of expected molecular weights that contained nucle-Figure 2. RT-PCR amplified cDNA products from total RNA isolated from guinea pig lens epithelial cells and from fiber cells. GAPDH mRNA was also amplified from the same samples as a control. Unincorporated primer-dimers can be observed in the epithelium sample (bottom band). MW lane contains molecular weight standards. The amplified products are stained with ethidium bromide.

otide sequence with high identity to the human prion protein sequence in the Genbank database. Translation of the guinea pig cDNA produced an amino acid sequence with high identity to the human prion protein. In addition, the GAPDH cDNAs amplified from guinea pig lens RNA were also sequenced and contained the expected nucleotides. The partial nucleotide sequence for guinea pig prion protein has been entered into the Genbank database (accession no. AF139166).

Prion protein gene expression increases in lens fiber cells

The relative levels of prion protein mRNA were assayed using RT-PCR and RNAs purified from epithelial and fiber cells of clear adult guinea pig lenses. Figure 2 shows that the in vivo expression of prion protein mRNA is relatively greater in lens fiber cells compared to lens epithelial cells. The amplified cDNAs migrated with the expected molecular weight (MW) and upon nucleotide sequence determination were found to contain the expected sequences consistent with the estimated MW. As in the experiments described above, we amplified GAPDH mRNA as an internal standard for expression levels. 24,26 The GAPDH levels were normalized in the epithelial and fiber cell samples. A comparison of levels of amplified prion protein cDNA in relation to GAPDH indicated that prion protein gene expression is approximately 8-10 fold greater in the fiber cells compared to epithelial cells in the guinea pig lens.

Prion protein expression increases in human lens epithelial cells exposed to oxidative stress

To determine the effect of oxidative stress, a known cataractogenic agent, on prion protein mRNA levels, a human lens epithelial cell line was exposed to 200 µM hydrogen peroxide for three hours (see Materials and Methods). The viability of treated and control cells as determined by trypan blue exclusion did not differ. However, RT-PCR analysis of prion protein transcripts (Fig. 3) revealed an approximately 8-10fold increase in the stressed cells versus the non-stressed cells normalized to the levels of GAPDH expression in the same samples. This is the first time to our knowledge that the induction of prion protein gene expression by oxidative stress has been demonstrated.

Detection of prion protein in human lenses

We examined samples of homogenized lens protein from clear human lenses by western blot. The results shown in Figure 4 demonstrate that a cross-reacting protein of approximately 28-30 kDa is detected in human lenses with the well-characterized monoclonal antibody, clone 3F4 (Senetek). The apparent molecular weight of this protein agrees with that expected for human prion protein. 1,2 

Immunolocalization of prion protein in human lens

Human lens sections from four lenses with cortical cataracts were examined for the presence of prion protein by immunohistochemistry using the 3F4 monoclonal antibody. Figure 4. Western blot detection of prion protein in human lens extract of 100 µg of total human lens protein was applied to the left lane and probed with 3F4 monoclonal antibody (Senetek). Prestained molecular weight markers were applied to the right lane.

Although prion protein in lens samples was readily detected on western blots, the immunofluorescence methodology used in this study detected little or no accumulations of prion protein in clear lenses or normal regions of these lenses with cortical cataracts. Lens regions where fiber cell degeneration is present are shown in the brightfield micrographs in Figure 5 (Panel I, A and B). A higher magnification brightfield view of disorganized fiber cells is shown in Figure 5 (Panel I, C and E.) The adjacent sections, D and F, show immunofluorescent detection of prion protein that correlates with regions of fiber cell disorganization. The prion protein immune complexes were visualized with a green fluorescenttagged secondary antibody and photographed in black and white.

Panel II shows a region from a different lens analyzed in a similar manner. Section A shows a brightfield photomicrograph of the posterior region of this lens. Section B shows immunofluorescent detection of prion protein visualized with a green fluorescent-tagged secondary antibody with staining observed only in regions of disorganization of the normal lens fiber cell pattern. Section C shows the same field probed with antibodies raised against MIP26 protein. MIP26 immune complexes were visualized using a red-fluorescenttagged secondary antibody and also photographed in black and white. In addition, no SV40 large T antigen was de-tected in any of the human lens sections analyzed in a similar manner. The staining pattern obtained using anti-MIP26 antibodies is significantly different from prion protein immunostaining. As seen in section C of Panel II, MIP26 staining is predominantly associated with the fiber cell membrane pattern seen in the brightfield photograph. The arrowheads in sections B and C of Panel II designate a fiber cell with differential prion protein and MIP26 staining.

Discussion

The present study provides evidence that prion protein and its mRNA are expressed in human and animal lenses. Relative to the expression of the housekeeping gene GAPDH, prion protein transcripts were found to be significantly greater in fiber cells than epithelial cells in vivo. This finding agrees with experiments demonstrating increases in prion protein expression during the in vitro terminal differentiation of muscle cell myoblasts and neuronal cells into elongated cell types. [27][28][29][30][31][32][33] We also demonstrate that prion protein expression increases in cultured lens epithelial cells exposed to hydrogen peroxide, a well-established cataractogenic agent. Paradoxically, the normally secreted major N-terminal portion of βAPP is thought to protect cells against oxidative stress and maintain homeostasis. [34][35][36] In contrast, processed Aβ peptides derived from the transmembrane region of βAPP produce deleterious effects by forming amyloid protein structures that produce oxidative stress. [13][14][15]20 In addition, this paradoxical relationship to oxidative stress appears to apply to prion protein as well. 30,31 Normal prion protein in the non-amyloidogenic conformation is protective against oxidative stress by influencing the activity of superoxide dismutase. In contrast, the amyloid prion protein structure characteristic of the 'scrapie' conformation is deleterious to cells. 1,2 The present data demonstrating increased prion protein expression, together with changes in the protein-folding environment of cataractous lenses 13,14,37 suggests that an examination of lenses for the scrapie prion protein conformation might be successful.

A recent formulation of the mechanism of Alzheimer pathophysiology associated with degenerative diseases of muscle and brain and involving the accumulation of prion protein, states that aging and oxidative stress are exacerbated by the overexpression of βAPP. 11,12 This concept continues to be tested in an effort to understand the mechanisms involved in both sporadic and hereditary IBM and AD. 38 Previously, we demonstrated that βAPP, Aβ and presenilin proteins increase with oxidative stress and accumulate in regions of lens fiber cell disorganization and degeneration. The present study adds prion protein to this list. It has been well established that lens opacification, the medical condition of cataract, has been associated with oxidative stress. [17][18][19] Together these studies linking AD and prion proteins with cataract formation further support our hypothesis that Alzheimer pathophysiology contributes to the mechanism of lens degeneration linked with oxidative stress. 20,21,25 In addition, we demonstrate that prion protein expression increases significantly in cultured human lens epithelial cells exposed to oxidative stress. Since the normal lens is exposed to chronic oxidative stress, the increase in prion protein expression is consistent with data demonstrating that prion protein acts to protect muscle and brain cells against oxidative stress by modulating Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (Cu,Zn SOD) activity. [28][29][30][31][32][33][34] For example, expression of higher levels of prion protein in these cell types increases their resistance to oxidative stress. In summary, our data raises the possibility that prion protein may be a useful marker for lens histopathology, and suggests that further studies of a potential role for prion protein as a contributor to lens pathology are warranted.

Acknowledgements

We are grateful to Nicole Newman (NIH, Bethesda, MD) for the preparation and staining of histological sections. We thank Sharon Kiang for assistance in PCR experiments and Preeti Samtani in western blot experiments, and Sandro Rodrigues (UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical School) for assistance with immunohistochemistry experiments.

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. Reverse transcriptase dependent PCR detection of prion protein and GAPDH (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase) transcripts in guinea pig and monkey lens samples. Primers were derived from exons one and two found in the bovine sequence listed in the Genbank database. The amplified products are stained with ethidium bromide.

Figure 3 .3Figure 3. Cultured human lens epithelial cells were exposed to a 200 µM bolus of hydrogen peroxide for three hours. RNA from exposed and control cells were assayed for prion protein and GAPDH mRNA expression by RT-PCR. The left two lanes show amplified products, stained with ethidium bromide, from non-exposed cells and the right two lanes from cells exposed to hydrogen peroxide.Figure4. Western blot detection of prion protein in human lens extract of 100 µg of total human lens protein was applied to the left lane and probed with 3F4 monoclonal antibody (Senetek). Prestained molecular weight markers were applied to the right lane.

Figure 5 .5Figure 5. Brightfield and fluorescence photomicrographs of cataractous human lenses. Panel I: A and B, Low and high magnification brightfield micrographs of a human lens showing the distribution of fiber cell disorganization. Panel I: C and E, Brightfield micrographs with corresponding immunofluorescent detection of prion protein (D and F, respectively). Panel II A, Brightfield image of human lens fiber cells showing regions of fiber cell disorganization. B and C, Black and white images of immunofluorescence analyses of the same lens region. Immunodetection of prion protein visualized with a green fluorescent tag is shown in B and Immunodetection of membrane intrinsic protein 26 visualized with a red fluorescent tag is shown in C.

