Expression of matrix metalloproteinases in the muscle of patients with inflammatory myopathies

To investigate the role of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) in the pathogenesis of inflammatory myopathies and the amyloid formation in sporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM). Background: MMPs comprise a family of calcium-dependent zinc endoproteinases induced by cytokines and secreted by inflammatory cells. They enhance T-cell migration or adhesion and degrade components of the extracellular matrix proteins. Some MMPs also have been implicated in the formation of ␤-amyloid. Methods: We examined the expression of MMPs with single and double immunocytochemistry using antibodies against MMP-2, MMP-3, MMP-7, MMP-9, major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I, CD8 ϩ cells, macrophage, and ␤-amyloid precursor protein (␤-APP) on serial muscle biopsy sections from patients with s-IBM, polymyositis (PM), dermatomyositis (DM), and disease control specimens. The enzyme activity of MMPs was measured by gelatin substrate zymography. Results: Only the gelatinases, MMP-9 and MMP-2, were expressed in the muscle. In s-IBM and PM, but not the control specimens, MMP-9 and MMP-2 immunostained the non-necrotic and MHC class-I-expressing muscle fibers, and MMP-9, but not MMP-2, immunostained the autoinvasive CD8 ϩ cytotoxic T cells. Zymography in muscle homogenates confirmed the increased MMP-2 and MMP-9 enzymatic activity. MMP-2, but not MMP-9, immunostained the rimmed vacuoles in s-IBM and colocalized with ␤-APP, suggesting a possible involvement with the amyloid deposits. Conclusions: Because collagen IV is prominent on the muscle membrane, the overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) 2 and 9 on the non-necrotic muscle fibers in polymyositis (PM) and sporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM) may facilitate lymphocyte adhesion and enhance T-cell-mediated cytotoxicity by degrading extracellular matrix proteins. The findings may have practical implications in considering therapeutic trials with MMP inhibitors in patients with PM and s-IBM.

Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) comprise a family of calcium-dependent zinc endoproteinases 1 involved in the remodeling of the extracellular matrix in a variety of physiologic and pathologic processes. They consist of at least 18 members that have in common a propeptide and an N-terminus catalytic domain. 2 According to fibronectin-like repeats and the transmembrane or C-terminus hemopexine-like domains, MMPs are categorized into the collagenases, gelatinases, stromelysin, and membranetype subfamilies. 2,3 Physiologically, MMPs play a role in embryonic development, bone and growth plate remodeling, ovulation, and wound healing. 4 In pathologic processes, MMPs participate in a variety of conditions, including breakdown of the blood-brain barrier, demyelination, facilitation of macrophage and T-cell adhesion to matrices and endothelial cells, secretion of membrane-anchored cytokines and exit of lymphoid cells from the circulation to tissues, propagation of an inflammatory response, and deposition of amyloid proteins. [4][5][6][7][8] Because the fundamental process in the immunopathology of inflammatory myopathies is related to activation, transendothelial migration, and adhesion of T cells to the targeted muscle fibers, 9 we investigated the role of MMPs in the muscles of patients with polymyositis (PM), dermatomyositis (DM), and sporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM). The amyloidogenic effect of MMPs was also examined in relation to the amyloid formation in s-IBM.

Materials and methods.

Frozen sections of muscle biopsy specimens from well-characterized patients with inflammatory myopathies, including seven patients with s-IBM, three with PM, and three with DM, were studied. Control specimens from three patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), two with ALS, and two normal subjects were concurrently examined. The tissues were processed for single and double immunocytochemistry and gelatin zymography as follows:

Single immunocytochemistry. Five-micrometer serial sections were fixed in acetone at 4 °C for 10 minutes, rinsed in 0.05 mol/L Tris-buffered saline (pH 7.5) for 15 minutes, and incubated for 30 minutes with a blocking solution containing 2% bovine serum albumin and 5% normal goat serum or 5% horse serum, as described. 8 The sections were then incubated overnight at 4 °C with one of the following antibodies: (1) mouse monoclonal immunoglobulin G (IgG) against human MMP-3 (dilution 1:400; Chemicon, Temecula, CA); (2) mouse monoclonal IgG against human MMP-7 (dilution 1:50; R & D System, Minneapolis, MN); (3) rabbit polyclonal IgG against human MMP-2 (dilution 1:400; Chemicon, Temecula, CA); and (4) goat polyclonal IgG against human MMP-9 (dilution 1:50; Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA). These affinity-purified antibodies are well-characterized and do not cross-react with each other. After being washed for 30 minutes in Trisbuffered saline, the sections were incubated with biotinylated goat antimouse IgG (for MMP-3 and MMP-7), biotinylated goat antirabbit IgG (for MMP-2), or biotinylated horse antigoat IgG (for MMP-9) followed by fluorescent isothiocyanate (FITC) avidin D.

Double immunocytochemistry and confocal imaging. Double immunofluorescence was performed to examine whether MMP-9 and MMP-2 are present on the CD8 ϩ cytotoxic T cells, macrophages, major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class-I-expressing muscle fibers, or on the ␤-APP-positive amyloid deposits. For double staining, frozen sections were incubated overnight at 4 °C with the polyclonal antibodies against MMP-9 or MMP-2, followed by biotinylated secondary antibodies and fluoresceinconjugated avidin (green), as described. 10 In brief, after rinsing and blocking with 2% bovine serum albumin, 5% normal goat serum, or 5% horse serum, the same sections were incubated with one of the following mouse IgG monoclonal antibodies against: (1) ␤-APP (dilution 1:10; Zymed, South San Francisco, CA), (2) CD8 (dilution 1:100; Couter, Miami, FL), ( 3) macrophage (Ber-Mac3, dilution 1:100; Dako, Carpinteria, CA), or (4) MHC class I (dilution 1:100; Dako, Carpinteria, CA) followed by TRITC (trimethylrhodamine isothiocyanate)-conjugated secondary antibody against mouse IgG (red). The slides were mounted and examined with a Zeiss photomicroscope equipped with epifluoscence optics. Confocal laser scanning microscopy was used for more accurate colocalization of the antigens expressed on the surface of cells or muscle fibers. To avoid cross-reactivity, despite blocking, we reconfirmed the results in serial sections stained separately for each of the primary antibodies.

Gelatin zymography. Ten percent polyacrylamide gels containing sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), impregnated with 1 g/mL gelatin (Novex, San Deigo, CA), were used to detect gelatinolytic MMPs. 11 Five 10-m-thick sections of muscle tissue were weighted, homogenized, and mixed with sample buffer (63 mmol Tris-HCL, pH 6.8, 10% glycerol, 2% SDS, 0.0025% bromophenol blue) under nonreducing conditions. Protein concentration was determined with a modified Bradford dye-binding procedure (Bio-Rad protein assay; Bio-Rad, Herts, UK). SDS protein electrophoresis was performed at 4 °C to prevent gelatin degradation loading an equal amount of protein in each gel. The gels were washed with zymogram-renaturing buffer (Novex) containing Triton X-100 to remove the SDS, followed by incubation in a zymogram-developing buffer (Novex) for 24 to 72 hours at 37 °C. Subsequently, the gels were stained for 6 hours in 30% methanol: 10% acetic acid containing 0.1% (wt/vol) Coomassie blue R250 and destained in the same buffer without dye. Gelatinase activity was detected as an unstained band on blue background representing areas of gelatin digestion. Semiquantification of zymograms was achieved using a computer-assisted scanner (NIH 1.6 program, provided by Scientific Computing Re- 

MMP ϭ matrix metalloproteinase; MHC ϭ major histocompatibility complex; s-IBM ϭ sporadic inclusion body myositis; PM ϭ polymyositis; DM ϭ dermatomyositis; DMD ϭ Duchenne muscular dystrophy; NL ϭ normal.

source Center at the National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD).

Results. Immunocytochemistry (table).

Muscle fibers and inflammatory cells. The antibodies against MMP-3 and MMP-7 did not stain inflammatory cells or muscle fibers in any of the studied specimens. In contrast, the antibodies against MMP-9 and MMP-2 immunostained muscle fibers and inflammatory cells in the diseased, but not the normal, muscles as follows:

In s-IBM and PM, but not DM, DMD or the other disease controls, MMP-9 and MMP-2, was found expressed on the muscle membrane of the healthy, non-necrotic, and MHC class-I-expressing muscle fibers surrounded or invaded by the CD8 ϩ cytotoxic T cells (figure 1). The non-necrotic nature of these fibers was shown in a serial section stained with hematoxylin-eosin, as shown in the inset (figure 1). The membrane of some healthy, MHC class-Iexpressing muscle fibers remote from the areas of inflammation was also weakly positive for MMP-9 or MMP-2, as shown with confocal microscopy (figure 1). Most of the autoinvasive CD8 ϩ T cells were positive for MMP-9 but not MMP-2 (figure 2). Although quantitative assessment was not performed, it appears that most of the CD8 ϩ cells were MMP-9-positive. Some of the macrophages were also MMP-9-positive (data not shown). The membrane of the MHC class-I-positive, healthy muscle fibers, invaded or not by CD8 ϩ T cells, was MMP-2-and MMP-9-positive only in PM and s-IBM but not in DM and DMD, probably because of the relative absence of such fibers in the latter condi-

Figure 1. Transverse frozen, serial, sections of a muscle biopsy specimen from a patient with sporadic inclusion body myositis immunostained with polyclonal antibodies against matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) or matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) (green, top panel) and with monoclonal antibody against major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I (red, middle panel). The antibodies against MMP-2 and MMP-9 immunostain the muscle membrane of the non-necrotic and MHC class-I-expressing muscle fibers, surrounded or invaded by the CD8 ϩ cytotoxic T cells. A serial section stained with hematoxylin-eosin (inset) shows that these fibers are non-necrotic. The MMP-2 and MMP-9 colocalize with MHC class I, as shown with confocal laser microscopy (lower panel). The membrane of some MHC class-I-positive muscle fibers remote from the areas of inflammation is also weakly positive for MMP-2 and MMP-9 (magnification, ϫ400).

tions. In contrast, in all the specimens, including DMD and DM, the membrane and the cytoplasm of the regenerating muscle fibers and the endothelial cells of the blood vessel walls immunostained strongly with antibodies against MMP-2 and MMP-9 (not shown). In DM and DMD, few scattered, endomysial inflammatory cells were also positive for MMP-9 but not MMP-2. Standard control specimens routinely used for our immunocytochemical preparations 10 confirmed the specificity of the reactions. Amyloid deposits. A unique finding in s-IBM was the immunostaining of several rimmed vacuolated fibers with antibodies against MMP-2 but not MMP-9 (figure 3). With double immunostaining, the MMP-2-positive regions, near or within the vacuoles, were positive for ␤-APP (figure 3).

Gelatin zymography. With zymography, two major bands of varying gelatinolytic activity, a 92-kd band corresponding to MMP-9 and a 72-kd band corresponding to MMP-2, were detected in all muscle biopsy specimens, including s-IBM, PM, DM, and DMD (figure 4A). A weaker band was also noted in the normal and ALS muscle, probably because of the presence of MMP-9 and MMP-2 in the blood vessels (figure 4A). Semiquantification of the gelatinolytic activity showed that MMP-2 and MMP-9 were increased in the inflammatory myopathies and DMD compared to ALS and control specimens (figure 4B). In DMD, the high activity most likely corresponds to enhanced expression of MMP-9 and MMP-2 in the regenerating muscle fibers. A minor 62-kd band of MMP-2 gelatinolytic activity, attributed to an activated form of 72-kd gelatinase, was observed in all the myopathic conditions but not the ALS or control specimens (figure 4A).

Discussion. In all studied muscle biopsy specimens, there was constitutive expression of MMP-2

Figure 2. Transverse frozen, serial, sections of a muscle biopsy specimen from a patient with sporadic inclusion body myositis immunostained with polyclonal antibodies against matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) or metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) (green, top panel) and with monoclonal antibodies against CD8 ϩ (red, middle panel). A serial section stained with hematoxylineosin (inset) shows that the MMP-9positive, CD8 ϩ cells, invade nonregenerating, non-necrotic muscle fibers. MMP-9, but not MMP-2, immunostains some of the autoinvasive CD8 ϩ T cells, as shown with double colocalization with confocal laser microscopy (lower panel) (magnification, ϫ400).

and MMP-9 in the endomysial blood vessels and enhanced expression in the regenerating muscle fibers in all the myopathic conditions. However, unique to PM and s-IBM, but not the disease control specimens, was the upregulation of MMP-9 and MMP-2 on the muscle membrane of the healthy, MHC class-I-expressing muscle fibers invaded by CD8 ϩ T cells and the colocalization of MMPs with MHC class-I antigen. The findings suggest that in PM and s-IBM, the MMP-9 and MMP-2 may play a role in promoting the adhesion of autoinvasive T cells to the muscle, as proposed for other autoimmune diseases such as MS, 12,13 experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, 14 Guillain-Barre syndrome, 15 and rheumatoid arthritis. 16,17 The gelatinase MMP-2 secreted by a range of cells and the gelatinase MMP-9 secreted mainly by inflammatory cells have the ability to degrade many extracellular matrix components, including proteoglycans, fibronectin, laminin, glycoprotein, and various types of collagen, especially type-IV collagen. 2,[18][19][20][21][22] The skeletal muscle fibers are surrounded by a basement membrane (basal lamina) that contains predominantly type-IV collagen, laminin, fibronectin, and heparin sulfate proteoglycan. Because the substrate specificities of MMP-9 and MMP-2 are similar to the natural components of the basal lamina, 23 the noted upregulation of MMPs in the muscle membrane of patients with PM and s-IBM may play an active role in disrupting of the integrity of the muscle fibers by the autoinvasive cytotoxic T cells. The presence of MMP-9 on some CD8 ϩ T cells is consistent with the observation that MMP-9 is produced by activated T cells. 6 Cytokines, including tumor necrotic factor-␣ (TNF-␣), interleukin-1 (IL-1), and transforming growth factor-␤ (TGF-␤), 2,24,25 which are variably increased in PM and s-IBM, 26 are also known inducers of MMP production and may serve as an additional source for upregulating MMP and facilitating T-cellmediated myocytotoxicity.

Another finding in the current study was the colocalization of MMP-2, but not MMP-9, with the ␤-APP-positive areas within the vacuoles of s-IBM. MMP-2 can cleave the full-length ␤-APP and may have an amyloidogenic effect. 27 Conversely, amyloid peptides can induce in vitro the expression of MMPs. 28 Of interest, in the brains of patients with AD, there is elevation of MMP-2. 29 The inflammatory and amyloidogenic potential of MMP-2 may be analogous to IL-1␤, which is also expressed in the vacuoles of s-IBM and the amyloid plaques of AD. 26 It can be proposed that in s-IBM, the chronic inflammation may induce the production of both cytokines and MMPs, which have the potential to enhance amyloid formation. In turn, the formed amyloid may contribute to the chronicity of inflammation and cytotoxicity by enhancing the production of MMPs, as proposed for IL-1␤ in s-IBM and AD. 26 The upregulation of the gelatinases (MMP-9 and MMP-2) in inflammatory myopathies may offer the opportunity for therapeutic interventions. Synthetic MMP inhibitors were found to suppress experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis by preventing cell trafficking across the blood-brain barrier, probably by reducing the production of TNF-␣, or by inhibiting the secretion of MMPs by the inflammatory cells. 30 A major mechanism of action of interferon-␤ in pa- tients with MS also may be the inhibition of MMP-9 activity of T lymphocytes. 31 Inhibitors of MMP-9 and MMP-2, therefore, should be considered in future trials of patients with inflammatory myopathies. 

Article abstract-Objective: To estimate the incidence of meningiomatosis and schwannomatosis, and their familial occurrences and relation to type 2 neurofibromatosis (NF2) in a well-defined population. Methods: Patients with histologically verified intracranial, spinal, or peripheral schwannomas or meningiomas, who were residents of the Helsinki University Hospital catchment area (population, 1,713,000) from January 1, 1985, to December 31, 1995, were included in the study. The Population Register Center was used to identify relatives of all the patients, and their data were linked further to the Finnish Cancer Registry to find NF2-related tumors. Detailed pedigrees were constructed for the patients with NF2, schwannomatosis, meningiomatosis, patients with relatives with histologically verified schwannomas or meningiomas, and patients younger than 25  Schwannomas and meningiomas usually occur as single and benign (World Health Organization ͓WHO͔ grade I) slow-growing tumors in otherwise healthy individuals. The presence of multiple tumors and familial clustering of patients suggest involvement of genetic factors in accordance with several known familial cancer syndromes. 1 Type 2 neurofibromatosis (NF2), inherited in an autosomal dominant manner with high penetrance, predisposes at an early age to multiple schwannomas, meningiomas, and spinal ependymomas, with bilateral vestibular schwannomas as the classic diagnostic hallmark. [2][3][4] Approxi-mately 50% of patients have no family history and carry new mutations. 2,3 NF2 is caused by mutations in the NF2 tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 22q12, the inactivation of which plays a crucial role in the tumorigenesis of sporadic schwannomas and meningiomas. 5 The severity of the disease ranges from mild (late onset, slow-growing vestibular schwannomas, few other tumors) to aggressive (early onset, multiple rapidly growing schwannomas and meningiomas causing early death). 2,3 There is a heterogeneous and poorly defined group of patients who do not have bilateral vestibular schw-

See also page 4

From the Departments of Neurosurgery (Drs. Antinheimo and Ja ¨a ¨skela ¨inen), Neurology (Dr. Sainio), and Pathology (Dr. Carpe ´n), University of Helsinki; and The Finnish Cancer Registry (Drs. Sankila and Pukkala), Helsinki, Finland. Supported by a grant from the Maire Taponen Foundation. Received May 26, 1999. Accepted in final form July 29, 1999. Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr. Jussi Antinheimo, Department of Neurosurgery, Helsinki University Hospital, Topeliuksenkatu 5, FIN-00260 Helsinki, Finland; e-mail: jussi.antinheimo@helsinki.fi

Figure 3 .3Figure 3. Transverse frozen, serial, sections of a muscle biopsy specimen from a patient with sporadic inclusion body myositis stained with Gomori trichrome (A), with polyclonal antibody against metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) (B), and with monoclonal antibody against ␤-amyloid precursor protein (␤-APP) (C). The MMP-2-positive regions near or within the vacuoles are positivefor ␤-APP, as confirmed with dual colocalization (D) (magnification, ϫ400).

Figure 4 .4Figure 4. (A) Zymographic patterns in inflammatory myopathies and control specimens. Zones of clearing (white bands) represent gelatinolytic proteinase activity. Two major bands, a 92-kd band corresponding to metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) and a 72-kd band corresponding to metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2), are detected in all muscle specimens but more strongly in the myopathies. A minor band, corresponding to a 62-kd band of MMP-2 gelatinolytic activity, is seen only in the myopathies but not in ALS or the control specimens. (B) Densitometric semiquantitation of gelatinolytic activities show that MMP-9 (92-kd) and MMP-2 (72-kd) are increased in the inflammatory myopathies and Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) compared to ALS and control specimens. The increased expression in DMD probably is because of the abundance of MMP-positive regenerating muscle fibers.

TableImmunostaining pattern of endomysial inflammatory cells and muscle fibers in patients with inflammatory myopathies and control subjectsEndomysialNon-necrotic, MHCinflammatoryclass I positiveRegeneratingEndothelialcellsmuscle fibersmuscle fiberscells␤-amyloid

