Muscular dystrophy in adult and aged anti-NGF transgenic mice resembles an inclusion body myopathy

The role of nerve growth factor (NGF) and its receptors in the physiology of skeletal muscles has not been extensively studied in animal models. We describe the production of transgenic lines of mice expressing a neutralizing antibody against NGF (␣D11) and the morphological and histochemical analysis of skeletal muscles from adult and aged anti-NGF mice. This study reveals that the chronic deprivation of NGF results in a decreased size of myofibers of dorsal and hindlimb muscles in adult but not in postnatal day (P)2 mice. In myofibers from adult anti-NGF mice, the presence of central nuclei, vacuolization of the cytoplasm, and inflammatory cell infiltration was observed. The immunohistochemical analysis of these muscular fibers revealed an upregulation of p75 expression, a decrease in adenosine triphosphatase (ATP)ase activity, and a subsarcolemmal Congo Red-positive staining. Immunostaining with an antibody against amyloid precursor protein showed an increased labeling of the cytoplasm of myofibers from adult and aged anti-NGF mice. These features are reminiscent of human myopathies, such as inclusion body myositis. We conclude that NGF deficits might be relevant for a class of human myopathies.

Nerve growth factor (NGF), the prototype molecule of the neurotrophin family, is essential for the development, survival, and differentiation of selected neuronal populations in the nervous system (Levi-Montalcini, 1987). Besides its role in the nervous system, NGF and its receptors trkA and p75 are widely expressed in nonneuronal tissues, including skeletal muscles, where its function is largely unknown. During muscle morphogenesis and cell differentiation, p75 is expressed in myoblasts, while NGF mRNA is present in cells adjacent to myoblasts (Wheeler and Bothwell, 1992). p75 mRNA and NGF binding sites have been observed in the developing muscle of chick (Raivich et al., 1985) and human (Enfors et al., 1991) embryos. The expression of NGF and its low-affinity receptor in myoblasts is developmentally regulated by multiple factors during myogenesis (Erck et al., 1998). Moreover, the presence of p75 has been related to myoblastic differentiation and fusion into myotubes in vitro (Brodie and Sampson, 1990;Heuer et al., 1990;Seidl et al., 1998). In cultured skeletal muscle, NGF is able to influence the membrane properties of skeletal muscles through the regulation of Naϩ and Kϩ channels (Brodie and Sampson, 1990;Vigdor-Alboim et al., 1999).

The expression of NGF, TrkA, and P75 has been observed, although at relatively low levels, in adult rodent and human skeletal muscle explants (Heumann et al., 1984;Baron et al., 1994;Yamamoto et al., 1996). Moreover, p75 is expressed in regenerating muscle fibers from patients affected by Duchenne muscular distrophy (Baron et al., 1994), suggesting an involvement of NGF in human myopathies. However, the expression and the possible function of NGF and its receptors in adult skeletal muscles have been scarcely investigated.

Interestingly, ngf ϩ/- (Chen et al., 1997), ngf -/- (Crowley et al., 1994), trkA -/- (Smeyne et al., 1994), and p75 -/-knockout mice (Lee et al., 1992) were not reported to display abnormalities at the level of the skeletal muscles. A reduction in the size of leg muscles was qualitatively described in rat pups born from anti-NGF injected pregnant rats, but no characterization was reported (Aloe et al., 1981). Consequently, data concerning the role of NGF in the muscular system in vivo are largely missing, with the only exception of the decreased amount of NGF in genetically dystrophic mice (Furukuwa et al., 1977;Furukawa and Hayashi, 1979).

In this study, we describe a severe skeletal muscle atrophy phenotype in a newly derived line of transgenic mice that expresses a neutralizing antibody against NGF (␣D11) and thrives to adulthood.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Generation of Anti-NGF Transgenic Mice

The variable regions of the light and heavy chains of the anti-NGF rat monoclonal antibody ␣D11 were cloned from the corresponding hybridoma cell line (Cattaneo et al., 1988) using the rapid amplificaton of cDNA ends (RACE) method (Ruberti et al., 1993) and reassembled with constant regions of the human immunoglobulins (Ruberti et al., 1993), yielding the chimaeric human/ rat antibody ␣D11. The constructs were placed under the transcriptional control of the ubiquitous human cytomegalovirus (CMV) early region promoter (-601 to -16;Boshart et al., 1985). The transcriptional units of the light and the heavy chain genes of the chimaeric ␣D11 antibody were digested from the plasmids pcDNneo/VK␣D11HuCK (light chain) and pcDNAI-neo/ VH␣D11HuC␥ (heavy chain) using KpNI-ApaLI and Kpni-XbaI, respectively. The fragments were separately injected into 1-cell fertilized B6SJL mouse eggs (DNX Corp, Princeton, NJ, USA) to obtain lines of mice expressing either the light or the heavy chain. The analysis of genomic DNA and of RNA was performed as described previously (Piccioli et al., 1995).

Mice expressing the functional anti-NGF antibody (anti-NGF mice) were obtained by crossing mice expressing the light chain (CMV-VK␣D11) with mice expressing the heavy chain (CMV-VH␣D11). In particular, families 1 and 2 were derived by crossing the transgenic lines CMV-VK␣D11#A with CMV-VH␣D11#D, and CMV-VK␣D11#B with CMV-VH␣D11 #C, respectively.

Chimaeric ␣D11 Antibody Levels in the Blood Serum and Embryonic Tissues of Transgenic Mice

The levels of antibody in the blood serum of transgenic mice was analyzed by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), as previously described (Molnar et al., 1998), with the difference that the chimaeric antibody was detected using a secondary antihuman IgG biotinylated antibody. The amount of recombinant antibody was determined by comparison to a calibration curve obtained with purified ␣D11 antibody (from 0.125 ng to 250 ng). Blood serum from adult (2 months old) transgenic mice was diluted 1:10. For analysis of the content in mice embryos, tissues were collected at embryonic age 13 (E13) and 15 (E15) and homogenized as described (Molnar et al., 1998). Homogenized tissues were then diluted 1:10 and processed as described above. The absence of cross-reactivity with neurotrophin-3 (NT-3) in vivo was tested by ELISA using NGF or NT-3 as coating. A statistical analysis (oneway analysis of variance, ANOVA) was performed.

Histological Analysis

Care and handling of the animals were approved by the National Committee (Law on Animal Care, 116/1992, Italy). In all the experiments, we used as controls mice expressing only the heavy chain (VH only) and hence that do not produce anti-NGF antibodies. The phenotype of these trangenic controls is not different from wild type mice.

Postnatal day (P)2 mice were killed and fixed by immersion in 4% paraformaldehyde in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Adult (2 months old) and aged (15 months old) double transgenic mice (VH and VK) and transgenic controls (VH only) were anesthetized with 10.5% chloral hydrate/saline (8 l/g body weight), and perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS. Trigeminal, vestibular, and nodose ganglia were removed, postfixed for 2 hours at 4°C, cryoprotected in 30% sucrose for 1 hour and then in 20% sucrose overnight. The day after, tissues were frozen in isopentane at -20°C. Longitudinal sections (10m-thick) were collected on gelatin-coated slides and stored at -80°C until processing. Sections were thawed, preincubated in 10% fetal calf serum and 5% bovine serum albumin, and processed for detection of different antigens using the horseradish peroxidase Elite Standard kit (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA). Anti-TrkA (mouse monoclonal MNAC13; Cattaneo et al., 1999;1:100), anti-TrkB and anti-TrkC (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA;1: 200) were used as primary antibodies. Parallel sections from transgenic and age-matched transgenic control (VH only) mice were collected on the same slide. Alternate serial sections were incubated with primary antibodies or stained with cresyl violet.

Quantitative analysis of the number of cells expressing the high-affinity receptors of neurotrophins (TrkA, TrkB, and TrkC) was performed on longitudinal sections of trigeminal ganglia from transgenic control and anti-NGF mice. To quantify in a semisterological manner the number of positive cells, neurons from one section every 10 were counted. Only cells that showed a marked nucleus were considered for statistical analysis. Trigeminal ganglia from three transgenic controls and three anti-NGF transgenic mice were analyzed.

The morphological analysis of skeletal muscles was performed on fresh frozen tissue, except for P2 mice (paraformaldehyde-fixed tissue). For immunohistochemistry, sections (8-m-thick) were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde/PBS for 15 min at room temperature. Immunohistochemistry against p75 (Boehringer Mannheim, Germany) and TrkA was performed as described above.

Adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) enzyme histochemistry was performed on sections incubated in a solution containing 5 mg/10 ml of adenosine triphosphate (Sigma, St. Louis, MO), pH 9.4, diluted in 0.1 M glycine buffer and 0.75 M CaCl 2 . Sections were then developed in 2% cobalt chloride (Sigma) and ammonium sulphide (Sigma) and mounted in glycerine jelly.

RESULTS

Production of Anti-NGF Transgenic Mice

The generation of ␣D11 anti-NGF mice was achieved by the use of the ubiquitous CMV promoter that determines a developmental expression of the driven transgenes (Van den Pol and Ghosh, 1998). The individual heavy and light chain ␣D11 transgenes start to be expressed at high levels in the late postnatal period, leading to the formation of functional anti-NGF antibodies at P90 (Fig. 1A). Moreover, the two-tier approach (Fig. 1B) used to obtain families #1 and #2 transgenic mice, allowed us to circumvent the effect of an early exposure to functional antibodies during the embryonic stage of development. Indeed, at E13, the levels of antibodies are detectable, at least in family #2 embryos (Fig. 1A), but then decrease thereafter from E15 throughout the early postnatal period (Fig. 1A). Only after P45 do the antibody levels reach values above the detection threshold.

The analysis of the antibody contained in the blood serum of transgenic mice confirmed the specificity of this antibody for NGF, since it does not recognize neurotrophin-3 (Fig. 1C). In adult transgenic mice, the expression of TrkA, TrkB, and TrkC was analyzed by immunohistochemistry in the trigeminal, vestibular, and nodose ganglia, to establish the efficacy and the specificity of NGF neutralization. In the trigeminal ganglia, TrkA expression is decreased in about 50% of the cells (Fig. 2A,B), while TrkB (Fig. 2C,D) and TrkC (Fig. 2E,F) immunoreactivity is not decreased (Table I).In the vestibular ganglia, the numbers of TrkB-and TrkC-positive neurons are not affected by NGF deprivation (data not shown). Likewise, in the nodose ganglia, TrkA, TrkB, and TrkC expression did not change in anti-NGF transgenic mice with respect to transgenic controls (data not shown). In conclusion, we observed that NGF deprivation determines a reduced expression of TrkA in the trigeminal ganglia, while it does not affect the phenotype of sensory ganglia that are known to be dependent from other neurotrophins (e.g., vestibular and nodose ganglia).

Analysis of the Morphological and Histochemical Properties of Skeletal Muscles in Anti-NGF Transgenic Mice

The skeletal muscles of transgenic mice were examined at P2, 2 months, and 15 months of age. The histological analysis of sections stained with hematoxylin/eosin revealed that at P2 there is no difference in the shape of muscular fibers of the dorsal Fig. 1. Anti-nerve growth factor (NGF) transgenic mice. A: Levels of transgenic antibody in tissues (embryonic day [E]13 and E15) and in blood serum (postnatal day [P]1 onwards) of anti-NGF transgenic mice (n ϭ 3). The dotted line indicates the threshold of sensitivity of the assay. Note that between E15 and P45, the antibody levels are undetectable. Note also that the antibody levels in family #2 are higher than those in family #1. B: Crossing mice expressing the light chain (cytomegalovirus [CMV]-VK␣D11) with mice expressing the heavy chain (CMV-VH␣D11) yields double transgenic offspring, which express a functional ␣D11 antibody (anti-NGF mice). C: The transgenic antibody in blood serum (n ϭ 6) recognizes NGF, but not neurotrophin-3 (NT-3), in enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). *P Ͻ 0.01. muscles from anti-NGF transgenic mice with respect to transgenic controls of the same age (Fig. 3A,B). On the contrary, at P90, sections from dorsal muscles (longissimus, ilio-costalis, and intertrasversarii; Fig. 3C,D) and gastrocnemius (Fig. 3E,F) revealed a marked atrophy of myofibers. These assumed a ring-shaped morphology (Fig. 3D) and often showed a clear vacuolization (Fig. 3F). In all sections obtained from transgenic mice, there is the tendency to have a more intense hematoxyphylic staining (Fig. 3D,F) with respect to controls (Fig. 3C,E). These features are completely absent in other muscles, such as those of the forelimbs and abdominal muscles (Fig. 3G,H). A quantification of the size distribution of skeletal muscle fibers for P2, adult and aged mice is shown in Figure 4. While at P2 there is no difference between anti-NGF and control mice (Fig. 4A), P60 and aged anti-NGF mice show a very significant decrease in the cross-sectional area of their skeletal muscle fibers with respect to age-matched controls (Fig. 4B and C). In aged transgenic mice, the percentage of small fibers is greatly increased with respect to P60 anti-NGF mice, showing a progression of the atrophic phenotype.

Some muscular fibers from anti-NGF transgenic mice showed the presence of central nuclei (Fig. 5A) and an inflammatory infiltrate (Fig. 5B). Immunohistochemical analysis showed a significantly increased immunoreactivity for the low-affinity p75 NGF receptor (Fig. 5C,D), while the intensity of the staining for TrkA was not changed in anti-NGF transgenic mice with respect to transgenic controls (Fig. 5E,F). The metabolic activity of subtypes of skeletal muscle fibers from anti-NGF transgenic mice was studied by ATPase enzyme histochemistry, which allows us to distinguish type I and type II fibers. The results showed that the darkly stained fibers (type II) are virtually absent in skeletal muscles from anti-NGF transgenic mice (Fig. 5G,H).

In anti-NGF transgenic mice, we also observed a marked staining with Congo Red under the sarcolemma (Fig. 6B) that it is not observed in transgenic control mice (Fig. 6A), which is diagnostic of a generic amyloid deposition. In order to verify whether this is due to an increased expression of amyloid precursor protein (APP), immunohistochemistry with anti-APP antibodies was performed. We found that APP expression is increased in muscle fibers from anti-NGF transgenic mice, showing a diffuse staining throughout the cytoplasm and corresponding to the plasma membrane (Fig. 6C and D).

DISCUSSION

Anti-NGF Transgenic Mice

The aim of our study was to exploit a newly derived line of transgenic mice (Ruberti et al., unpublished) that allows to analyze the role of NGF in adult organisms. Previous studies pointed out the importance of creating a comprehensive transgenic model that could assign a recognized function to NGF in adult tissues, overcoming the lethal effects of NGF deprivation during the early postnatal development exhibited by the existing models. Gene knockout by homologous recombination led to the generation of homozygous animals (ngf -/-) that do not survive the first postnatal weeks (Crowley et al., 1994). The heterozygous mice (ngf ϩ/-) reach an adult age, but the levels of NGF are only 75% of the total amount of NGF in wild type, leading to limited phenotypic changes (Chen et al., 1997). Our model allowed us to overcome the effects of NGF deprivation in the early postnatal period, due to a very low expression of the antibodies in the perinatal period. Moreover, the exposure of fetuses to anti-NGF antibodies during embryonal development is very short, occurring at a stage when NGF is not required for the maintainance of the neuronal phenotype (Davies et al., 1995). The two-tier approach, obtained by breeding between mice expressing the individual light or heavy chains, allowed us to achieve a dramatic increase in antibody levels, between P1 and P90 (a 2,000-fold increase). This is due to an increased expression of the individual chains over this time period, but also to an increased coexpression of the two chains in the same cells. The presence of a time window between E13 and P45, when the antibody levels are below detection, is very convenient. This is a consequence of the spatiotemporal regulation of the transcriptional activity of the CMV promoter (Van den Pol and Ghosh, 1998), in conjunction with the need for coexpression of two separate chains to achieve a functional antibody.

Specificity of the Transgenic Antibody in Recognizing NGF In Vivo

The anti-NGF antibody ␣D11 (Cattaneo et al., 1988;Ruberti et al., 1993) used to derive the anti-NGF transgenic mice has been shown not to cross-react with other neurotrophins in vitro (Gonfloni, 1995;Molnar et al., 1998). In order to verify that this is the case in vivo as well, the effects of NGF phenotypic knockout in the anti-NGF transgenic mice was observed in sensory ganglia, which are known to be dependent on different neurotrophins  (Snider, 1994). In trigeminal ganglia, we observed a decrease in expression of TrkA, as reported for trkA (-/-) mice (Smeyne et al., 1994). However, we did not observe a decrease in the number of neurons, probably reflecting the fact that this ganglion is supported by other growth  factors, in addition to NGF, such as NT-3 (Conover and Yancopoulos, 1997). Vestibular and nodose ganglia are strictly dependent on brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)/TrkB and on NT-3/TrkC expression (reviewed in Conover and Yancopoulos, 1997). In these ganglia, we observed neither a neuronal loss nor a change in the expression of TrkB and TrkC receptors, as expected if the antibody does not cross-react with other neurotrophins. Thus, the specificity of the transgenic anti-NGF antibody was demonstrated.  

Muscular Dystrophy in Anti-NGF Transgenic Mice Could be Related to an Inclusion Body Myositis

In this study, we analyzed the effects of NGF deprivation on skeletal muscles. Previous studies reported the expression of p75 and TrkA receptors in rodent and human muscles (Heumann et al., 1984;Baron et al., 1994;Yamamoto et al., 1996). Studies with cell cultures have not fully elucidated the role of NGF in skeletal muscles (Brodie and Sampson, 1990;Erck et al., 1998;Seidl et al., 1998;Vigdor-Alboim et al., 1999). In genetically dystrophic mice, there are lower amounts of NGF in the lower limbs and submaxillary glands (Furukawa et al., 1977;Furukawa and Hayashi, 1979). Antibody studies have been instrumental to elucidate many aspects of NGF functions in vivo (Levi-Montalcini, 1987), but skeletal muscles have not been recognized so far as targets for NGF activity. A reduction in the size of leg muscles has been qualitatively described in rat pups born from anti-NGF-injected rats, but no characterization was reported (Aloe et al., 1981). Likewise, data on skeletal muscles in ngf -/- (Crowley et al., 1994), trkA -/- (Smeyne et al., 1994), p75 -/- (Lee et al., 1992) knockout mice are not available. We show that NGF deprivation provokes, in adult anti-NGF animals, a marked and selective atrophy of back and hindlimb muscles, which is not present at birth (P2), when the levels of antibodies are below detection. The onset of the atrophy coincides with the increase in the level of antibody in the blood serum, as well as in tissues. The selectivity of the atrophy to some muscles could be due to different antibody levels, due to a differential expression from the CMV promoter. It has been reported that the expression of the CMV promoter varies with the type of muscular fiber (Baskar et al., 1996). Alternatively, the sensitivity to NGF deprivation may be different for different muscles.

The effects of NGF deprivation on muscular fibers could be due to a lack of NGF action at two distinct levels, i.e., at the level of the innervation of muscles and/or at the level of the myofibers. In the first case, there might be a direct involvement of the p75 receptor that is expressed in motoneurons of the spinal cord and that allows NGF to be retrogradely transported to the ventral horn of the spinal cord (Sendtner et al., 1996), where its actions are unknown. Although we observed no overall changes in markers for neurotransmitters, in motoneurones of the spinal cord of anti-NGF transgenic mice, a certain degree of shrinkage of choline-acetyl transferase (ChAT)-positive neurons is present (Capsoni et al., unpublished data). An altered innervation of the muscle could account for the effects observed in skeletal muscle morphology and metabolism. Preliminary studies have shown that the degree of ACh-receptor clustering at the neuromuscular junction is reduced in anti-NGF transgenic mice (Capsoni et al., unpublished data). Changes in innervation could determine the altered metabolism that is revealed by the observed absence of ATPase staining. In an alternative but not mutually exclusive picture, the morphological atrophy and the changes in the muscular metabolism could be due to the absence of a direct action of NGF on muscles. The upregulation of p75 in the muscle from anti-NGF mice suggests the presence of a homeostatic change, triggered to compensate for the reduced activity of NGF. Interestingly, the expression of TrkA does not change in transgenic mice with respect to controls. This observation appears to be in line with the absence of reported muscular deficits in patients with an autonomic neuropathy called congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis (CIPA), linked to mutations in TrkA (Mardy et al., 1999). The fact that p75 is upregulated and TrkA is not when NGF is withdrawn does not necessarily imply that NGF effects are mediated by p75 and, conversely, it does not imply that NGF effects are not mediated by TrkA.

The most interesting feature of the muscular dystrophy in anti-NGF transgenic mice is the presence of pathological findings that correlate with a human inflammatory myopathy known as inclusion body myositis (IBM; Vogel, 1998). This progressive pathology, which affects predominantly people older than 55 years, is characterized by atrophy of the myofibers, centralization of nuclei (Jin et al., 1998), and by the presence of rimmed vacuoles (Vogel, 1998). Although the vacuolization of myofibers is a common feature of many dystrophies (Griggs et al., 1995), the presence of hematoxyphilic staining in the muscular fibers of transgenic mice is reminiscent of deposits observed in biopsies from IBM. Indeed, skeletal muscles of anti-NGF mice exhibit deposits that can be stained with the amyloid staining dye Congo Red, as do IBM muscles (Askanas et al., 1993). Sporadic forms of IBM also show an inflammatory infiltrate within muscle fascicles (Yunis and Samaha, 1971), as observed in anti-NGF transgenic mice.

In human patients, the etiology of IBM remains unknown. IBM has been associated with several autoimmune diseases (Mikol and Engel, 1994), to common immunodeficiencies of variable origin (Dalakas and Illa, 1995), as well as to muscular deficits commonly found in Alzheimer's disease. Mice overexpressing the ␤-APP in muscles develop a myopathy similar to IBM (Jin et al., 1998). The skeletal muscles of anti-NGF transgenic mice show an increased expression of APP, which is present throughout the cytoplasm and close to the plasma membrane.

In conclusion, the study of anti-NGF transgenic mice has yielded insights into the actions of NGF at the level of skeletal muscles and could help in understanding the pathogenesis of an important class of human myopathies.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are grateful to Marco Stebel for management of the colonies, and to Jessica Franzot and Gabriella Rossi for genomic analysis of the mice.

Fig. 2 .2Fig. 2. Effects of NGF deprivation on trigeminal ganglia. TrkA expression in transgenic controls (A) and anti-NGF transgenic mice (B), revealed by immunohistochemistry with the anti-TrkA mAb MNAC13. The immunoreactivity for TrkB (C, D) and TrkC (E, F) is not changed in transgenic mice (D,F) with respect to controls (C, E). Scale bar ϭ 7 m.

Fig. 3 .3Fig.3. Skeletal muscles in anti-NGF transgenic mice show a marked atrophy. At P2, the size of dorsal muscle fibers in control (A) and in anti-NGF transgenic mice (B) is comparable. At P90, dorsal muscles of anti-NGF transgenic mice (D) revealed a marked atrophy of myofibers with respect to controls (C). Sections of P90 gastrocnemius muscle from anti-NGF transgenic mice (F) show an extensive vacuolization, absent in controls (E). Muscle fibers from P90 abdominal muscles are comparable in anti-NGF transgenic mice (H) and transgenic controls (G). Scale bars ϭ 8 m in A,B; 25 m in C-H.

Fig. 4 .4Fig. 4. Soma size distribution of myofibers at P2 (A), P90 (B), and in aged (15 months) mice (C). For each age, the values were obtained from six controls and six anti-NGF transgenic mice.

ŠFig. 5 .5Fig. 5. Morphological and histochemical properties of skeletal muscles in anti-NGF transgenic mice. Muscle fibers of anti-NGF transgenic mice show the presence of central nuclei (A, arrows) and of an inflammatory infiltration of lymphocytes (B, arrows). Immunoreactivity for p75 is almost absent in skeletal muscles from control mice (C), and is upregulated in dorsal muscles of anti-NGF mice (D). TrkA immunoreactivity is unchanged in skeletal muscles from control (E) and (F) anti-NGF transgenic mice. Adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) staining is decreased in skeletal myofibers from transgenic mice (H) with respect to controls (G). Scale bar ϭ 18 m in A, B; 20 m in C-F; 14 m in G, H.

Fig. 6 .6Fig. 6. Subsarcolemmal Congo Red staining (arrows) in muscles from anti-NGF mice (B), not present in myofibers from control mice myofibers (A). An increased cytoplasmatic and membrane staining for amyloid precursor protein is observed in anti-NGF mice (D) with respect to controls (C). Scale bars ϭ 10 m in A, B; 20 m in C, D.

TABLE I . Number of Cells Expressing TRKA, TRKB, and TRKC in the Trigeminal Ganglion of Heavy Chain (VH) Transgenic and Anti-Nerve Growth Factor (NGF) Transgenic Mice*IValues are expressed as cells/mm 2 and represent the mean Ϯ S.E.M. (n ϭ 3 for each group of mice).trkAϩtrkAϪtrkBϩtrkBϪtrkCϩtrkCϪVH mice50.6 Ϯ 5.392.5 Ϯ 8.24109.4 Ϯ 1.58 Ϯ 0.4593.4 Ϯ 2.25.6 Ϯ 3.91Anti-NGF mice140.4 Ϯ 10.56.44 Ϯ 4.0394.5 Ϯ 8.62.44 Ϯ 0.2194.5 Ϯ 8.52.1 Ϯ 0.2*

