High-dose immunoglobulin therapy in sporadic inclusion body myositis: a double-blind, placebo-controlled study

Introduction

Sporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM) is a chronic progressive inflammatory myopathy [7,9,37] with underestimated incidence [20,31]. s-IBM generally occurs in patients aged over 50 years, and with a 3:1 male preponderance [11,30]. However, young adults or children may also be affected [10]. Clinical characteristics are early involvement of distal muscles, in particular finger flexors and foot extensors, and asymmetric muscle atrophy predominantly in quadriceps muscles and arm flexors [12], fre-Abstract Sporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM) is an acquired inflammatory muscle disease of unknown cause. In general, s-IBM presents with slowly progressive, asymmetric weakness, and atrophy of skeletal muscle. There is a mild transitory or nil responsiveness to standard immunosuppressive treatment. A controlled cross-over study of 22 s-IBM patients over 3 months showed a partial improvement in those treated with high-dose intravenous immunoglobulin therapy (IVIG) versus placebo. The present study included 22 patients aged 32-75 years and with a mean duration of disease of 5.2 ± 3.6 years. They were randomized by a doubleblind, placebo-controlled, cross-over design to monthly infusions of 2 g/kg bodyweight IVIG or to placebo for 6 months each, followed by the alternative treatment. After 6 and 12 months the response to treatment was evaluated, using a modified Medical Research Council scale, Neuromuscular Symptom Score (NSS), the patient's own assessment of improvement, arm outstretched time, and electromyography. No seri-ous side effects were seen, in particular no viral infection and no major cardiac or neurological complications. Overall there was no progression of the disease in 90% of patients, unlike that which might have been expected in untreated patients. A mild and significant improvement (11%) in clinical symptoms was found using NSS, but not with other test procedures. There was a trend to mild improvement in treated patients when using other tests. Individual responses to treatment was heterogeneous. The validity of this study may be reduced by mismatch of groups with regard to age at onset and variability in disease expression. The findings of this study largely confirm those of a previous IVIG trial. Treatment with IVIG may be mildly effective in s-IBM by preventing disease progression or inducing mild improvement. Long-term studies are needed to evaluate further the benefit of IVIG therapy in s-IBM. quently accompanied by mild dysphagia [14]. Needle electromyography shows mixed myopathic and neuropathic changes [29,36]. Peripheral nerve involvement such as a reduction in sensory nerve conduction velocity [23] is seen in some cases. Pathological hallmarks of s-IBM are rimmed vacuoles with eosinophilic cytoplasmatic inclusions, which are immunoreactive with antibodies against several proteins such as amyloid, tau, ubiquitin, apolipoprotein E, and prion protein [32]. The diagnosis is confirmed by ultrastructural studies. Because of peri-and endomysial inflammation with cytotoxic CD8 + T-cells invading nonnecrotic muscle fibers [17], the hypothesis of an autoimmune mechanism in s-IBM has been put forward [18]. A hereditary form of inclusion body myositis was recently mapped to chromosome 9p1-q1 [2]. A steroid-responsive familiar form has also been described [28].

The administration of high-dose intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) has shown some benefit in therapy-resistant polymyositis and dermatomyositis in an open-label study [8]. Of 20 patients 15 had significant clinical improvement. An open-label uncontrolled study [1] in nine s-IBM patients showed possible stabilization of the disease. After a pilot study in four s-IBM patients [33] a controlled cross-over study [15] using 2 g/kg bodyweight IVIG or placebo per month for 3 months each showed statistically significant improvement in swallowing function. Functional improvement was found in 6 of 19 patients, but not in the total treatment group.

The present study was designed as a cross-over study to evaluate therapeutic efficacy, side effects, and disease progression in s-IBM patients over a 12-month period of IVIG treatment.

Methods

Study design

The study included 22 patients (8 women, 14 men), with a mean age of 59 ± 14 years (range 32-75, median 60) and a disease duration of 1-14 years. They were block-randomized by a double-blind, placebo-controlled cross-over design using monthly intravenous infusions of 2 g/kg bodyweight IVIG (Intraglobin F, Biotest Pharma GmbH, Germany) or placebo (1% human albumin in 2.5% glucose; Biotest) given 2-5 days per month for 6 months each (Fig. 1). Group 1 received IVIG first (3 women, 8 men; age 67 ± 12 years, median 71; duration of disease 5 ± 3 years), and group 2 received placebo first (5 women, 6 men; age 51 ± 11 years, median 53; duration of disease 5 ± 4). Mean duration of disease was similar in both groups. Between the two groups there was a significant difference in age. One patient in each group refused treatment after the first series of infusions. Of the 22 patients 19 patients had previously been treated with various drugs. All pretreated patients had received corticosteroids before and 25% had received immunosuppressive drugs (five with azathioprine, one with azathioprine and methotrexate). Six patients in each group remained on pretreatment medication. Nine patients received corticosteroids (2.5-15 mg per day), and three received corticosteroids (4-10 mg per day) and azathioprine (100-150 mg per day) and did not change their dose.

The block-randomization procedure was designed to ensure groups balanced for disease duration; the randomization code was not broken until all patients completed the study, and the results were analyzed. IVIG and placebo bottles were delivered monthly for each study patient and stored in the refrigerator. All bottles were labeled in the same way, there was no apparent difference between IVIG and placebo according to color, fluid turgidity, or frothing. During infusion, bottles were wrapped in an opaque plastic bag. Patients who were on immunosuppressive treatment for more than 3 months kept their medication unchanged. Only patients fulfilling clinical and histological criteria for definite s-IBM [34] were included. A muscle biopsy taken within the previous 3 years and showing light microscopic and ultrastructural evidence of s-IBM was mandatory for inclusion. Patients with stabilization or improvement on current immunosuppressive therapy, severe coronary heart disease, renal insufficiency, intolerance to homologous immunoglobulins or human serum proteins, or other relevant neuromuscular disorders were excluded. Patients confined to bed or wheelchair for longer than 1 year were also excluded.

Physiotherapy was administered to all patients in both groups once or twice per week throughout the entire trial. Physical examination, routine blood chemistry, and laboratory tests such as blood cell count and serum enzyme levels were carried out at each patient contact. Virological and serological tests for hepatitis B and C, human immunodeficiency virus, mumps virus, coxsackie virus, cytomegalovirus, human herpes virus, herpes simplex virus, borreliosis, and syphilis were performed before the first treatment and at the end of the study. The study protocol was approved by the local ethics committee. All patients gave written informed consent.

Clinical testing

Muscle strength was examined according to the Medical Research Council Scale (MRC) as modified by Masur et al. [25] from 0 (no contraction) to 6 (normal power) in the following muscles bilaterally: deltoid, biceps brachii, brachioradialis, triceps brachii, hand flexors and extensors, finger flexors and extensors, knee extensors, knee flexors, foot flexors and extensors; and in two muscle groups unilaterally: neck flexors and extensors. The maximum possible sum score was 180. MRC sum scores were evaluated at baseline and after 6 and 12 months. Statistical analysis was based on changes from baseline comparing IVIG to placebo as well as comparing start-and end-point of study. Upper and lower extremities were analyzed separately. Arm outstretched time [5,27] was measured in seconds (max. 60) at baseline and after 6 and 12 months of treatment. Testing was performed by two trained neurologists with assessed test-retest reliability.

The following 14 activities of daily life were evaluated by the Neuromuscular Symptom and Disability Functional Score (NSS) [15,33]: arm elevation over head plane, twist-top jars, buttoning, chewing, whistling, writing, taking off a sweater, turning a key, rising to sitting position, swallowing, lifting head, taking on shoes and socks, exhaustion following slight and following distinct strain. Ratings ranged from 0 (severe disability) to 3 (no disability) for each item, and the maximum score was 42. Patients had the option of taking part in follow-up examinations assessing MRC and NSS scores after end of study.

For the patient's subjective assessment of treatment effects, patients were asked to use a visual analogue scale, one representing grades of weakness and the other daily activities. Patients set a mark on each of these two scales, one end representing "no weakness" or "good activities," the other end "severe weakness" or "little activities."

Electromyographic testing was performed by a single operator at the same time points. Spontaneous activity (positive sharp waves per random insertion) was used as a marker of disease activity and graded from 1 to 3. Three muscles (biceps brachii, tibialis anterior, rectus femoris) were tested, and the grades of spontaneous activity were averaged.

Statistics

Descriptive statistics were used for each group separately according to sequence of treatment. Comparison of baseline scores (age, sex, MRC, NSS, and patient's own assessment) in both groups were evaluated by the Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test and Fisher's exact tests, with a significance level of P < 0.05. Efficacy of IVIG treatment was evaluated by analysis of covariance with factor treatment and covariate baseline value with a significance level of P < 0.05. Each sequence was analyzed separately due to cross-over effects.

Reference measures were the differences between baseline and month 6 and between month 6 and month 12 sum scores. Additionally, intraindividual changes between the different treatment periods were evaluated by 95% confidence limits.

There was no differentiation in primary and secondary end-point parameters. Safety analysis was performed by standardized rating of side effects. All patients who received treatment were included in the safety analysis. The two drop-outs (one in each treatment group) during early study phases were excluded from the efficacy analysis. No differentiation was made between intention-to-treat and Fig. 1 Flow diagram of progress through the trial, including patient registration, randomization, timing of outcome measures, and patient disposition per-protocol-analysis because there was no serious protocol violation. Efficacy evaluation was indicated as efficacy analysis.

Results

Muscle strength

Baseline MRC sum scores were slightly lower in group 1 without reaching significance (P = 0.49). Comparing baseline to 12-month MRC scores, we found a significant, mean overall improvement of 4.9 ± 6.4% (median 2.8%) in relative muscle strength in both groups (group 1 from 137.4 to 146.7, group 2 from 141.5 to 150.0; P = 0.003; 180 was set as 100%). Improvement or stabilization was observed in 90% of patients over the full study period (P = 0.001). In neither group was a significant difference between IVIG and placebo periods (Table 1, Fig. 2). Muscle strength in both groups improved slightly in the second half of the study. Subgroup analysis for upper and lower limbs showed similar results as seen for mean muscle sum score. The subgroup analysis in more severely affected patients and in patients with longer disease duration revealed a slightly better outcome in muscle strength if compared to the other patients. There was no difference in response to treatment with respect to creatine kinase levels or to the extent of inflammatory changes in the patient's muscle biopsy specimen prior to the study.

Neuromuscular Symptom Score

Baseline NSS sum scores were lower in group 1 than in group 2 but without reaching statistical significance (P = 0.27; Table 1). We found moderate but significant changes in NSS scores in each group (group 1, from 24.4 to 30.6; group 2, form 30.5 to 33.1) during the treatment phase (P < 0.05) between scores at the beginning and scores at the end of IVIG treatment. Furthermore, there were significant differences in NSS changes from baseline to the end of month 6, when treatment was compared to placebo therapy, determined by analysis of covariance (P < 0.05). During placebo administration there was no change in NSS in group 2 and even a slight decline in total NSS score in group 1 (Fig. 3).

Patient's own assessment of improvement

In each group we found a trend to moderate improvement in the patient's assessment of muscle weakness during treat- 

Electromyographic tests

We found a mild decline in mean spontaneous activity of 43% in each group over the full 12-month period, without statistical significance, when IVIG was compared to placebo (55% in group 1, 31% in group 2).

Side effects

No serious side effects occurred during treatment, in particular no viral infection and no major cardiac or neurological complications. Two patients reported on headache and elevated body temperature (38 °C), two patients developed allergic exanthema of the skin. All symptoms disappeared spontaneously within 1 day after the last infusion. IVIG was administered within 4 instead of 2 days subsequently in patients reporting side effects. Uterine carcinoma (pT2b N0 G2) was diagnosed in a 35-year-old woman of group 2 in the second (IVIG) study half. A radical operation was carried out, which did not lead to an interruption of the therapy schedule.

Laboratory findings

Throughout the treatment period serological tests revealed no pathological findings related to therapy. In patients who had elevated serum creatine kinase levels (> 500 U/l) at study onset, we found a moderate trend to decline during treatment only. In patients with normal to slightly elevated serum creatine kinase levels there was no significant change throughout the study.

Follow-up

After completion of the 1-year, double-blind, cross-over study 14 patients continued to receive treatment. Six patients stopped further treatment for various reasons: two required no further treatment because of clinical improvement, three moved away, and one developed T-cell lymphoma (Fig. 1). Seven of the 20 patients (four on medication, three off) who completed the trial were not available for follow-up.

Two of these had died (both on medication), one from heart attack and one from uterine carcinoma; neither death was related to the drug treatment. Two patients on medication and three off medication were not available for follow-up examinations because they had moved away.

Therefore ten patients on medication (group A), and three patients off medication (group B), participated in follow-up examinations (Fig. 1). The mean time difference between the end of the study and the follow-up examination was 15.7 months (5.6-24.3 months). Muscle strength and activities of daily life were evaluated according to the study protocol. Muscle strength as measured by the MRC scale showed a decline in both groups (Table 2), comparing study baseline to follow-up measures (-5.6 group A, -13 group B) and comparing end of study to follow-up measures (-7.7 group A, -16 group B). The loss of strength was more prominent in the untreated group, but without reaching statistical significance (P = 0.581).

Activities of daily life as measured by the NSS (Table 2) showed stabilization in the treated group and decline in the untreated group, comparing study baseline to followup measures (+2.5 group A, -4 group B) and comparing end of study to follow-up measures (-1.7 group A, -9 group B) without reaching statistical significance.

Discussion

The aim of this study was to evaluate the safety and efficacy of IVIG treatment in s-IBM patients with progressive disease. However, MRC and NSS scales showed differing results (Table 2). We found a moderate but statisti- cally significant improvement in NSS during IVIG treatment compared to placebo. In contrast, there were no significant changes in MRC scales during IVIG treatment. The positive outcome measured by NSS was corroborated by an equally moderate improvement in arm outstretched time and in patient's own assessment in the treatment phase and a decline of spontaneous activity in electromyography in both treatment groups throughout the full 12-month period. Overall there was no progression in 90% of patients, but rather a slight overall improvement throughout the study period of about 4.9% of relative muscle strength for both groups, which contrasts to the decline observed for untreated s-IBM patients after 1 year [3,24]. Similar findings have been reported by Dalakas et al. [15] in a crossover, double-blind study over 6 months. The natural history of s-IBM has been described in a follow-up study over 58 months as a mean decrease in muscle strength of 1.4% per month for all muscles. The most rapidly declining function was knee extension, with a mean decrease of 2% per month [24]. Therefore we may conclude that a relative improvement was seen in this study which cannot be assigned to spontaneous remission. However, it remains unclear to what extent the overall improvement can be attributed to specific effects of IVIG treatment or to unspecific effects brought about by the improved general care of patients, including physiotherapy. The suggestion of a moderate treatment effect is further supported by our follow-up examination of study patients, which showed a decline in strength both in patients with ongoing IVIG treatment and in patients off treatment, but with a trend to better outcome in the treated population according to MRC scales. Activities of daily life as evaluated by NSS showed a stabilization in the treated group and a trend to a decline in the untreated group.

NSS was chosen as a second outcome score for this study for evaluating more complex activities than muscle performance, only. Improvement in NSS can be attributed significantly to IVIG treatment. The improvement in NSS in group 1 remained stable after discontinuation of IVIG treatment throughout 6 months of placebo administration. This stability may be due to the immunomodulating effect of IVIG, which has been described as remaining effective up to 6 months after the end of IVIG administration, particularly in slowly progressive diseases [6,21,35]. Disease-stabilizing effects of long-term IVIG treatment (longer than 1 year) have also been shown in two other immunoinflammatory disorders, in multifocal motor neuropathy and in chronic inflammatory demyelinating neuropathy [19,26].

Recent studies [15] have reported significant improvement in swallowing function and functional improvement in 28% of patients according to MRC scales, without reaching statistical significance. Compared with this study, we found a similar heterogeneity between individual patients in response to treatment. In single patients the effect of IVIG treatment may be more impressive. No significant differences were observed in individual response to treatment in subgroup analyses of more severely affected patients or in patients with longer disease duration, or regarding the extent of inflammatory changes in the patient's muscle biopsy specimen. Other parameters need to be identified which would help to predict responsiveness to IVIG.

Overall a higher percentage of patients profited from IVIG in our study than in previous studies. We found an overall trend to 5% strength improvement and stabilization in 90% of patients as measured by MRC, but without reaching significance. Furthermore, there was significant improvement of 11% as measured by NSS. The slightly better response to treatment in our study may be due to the longer treatment period than in previous studies. Our study design may have led to an underestimate of the treatment effect because of carry-over effects. It is difficult to effect a sufficient wash-out period since the immunomodulating effect of IVIG proves effective up to 6 months after the end of IVIG administration [6,21,35].

s-IBM is frequently associated with systemic immune disorders or nonspecific autoantibodies [22]. T-cell heterogeneity has recently been shown in muscle lesions of s-IBM patients [4]. However, an altered immune function must be considered in the pathogenesis of s-IBM [13]. Therefore stabilization or improvement on IVIG treatment supports the hypothesis of s-IBM being an immune-mediated process, causing muscle damage by T-cell mediated cytotoxity. Hyperactive T-cell action along with further invasion of nonnecrotic muscle fibers may be downregulated by IVIG, as shown by histological examination of muscles before and after treatment [16]. However, we did not perform muscle biopsies for follow-up examination in this study.

Therapy with IVIG promises stabilization of disease as well as moderate improvement in the activities of daily life for many but not all s-IBM patients. Compared to standard immunosuppressive treatment, IVIG proved to be a safe therapeutic alternative. Slowing of disease progression or moderate improvement for a limited time may give s-IBM patients additional years of acceptable quality of life by maintaining reasonable strength and activity. Better treatment modalities are clearly needed for s-IBM. We suggest offering patients the chance of benefiting from IVIG on an individual trial basis.

Acknowledgements This study was presented in part at the 50th Annual Meeting of the American Academy of Neurology in Minneapolis (1998 Neurology 50 Suppl:A368-369) and at the 8th Meeting of the European Neurological Society in Nice (1998 J Neurol 245:A205). We are grateful to Biotest Pharma GmbH, Germany, for generous support of this study and to Metronomia GmbH, Munich, Germany for statistical analysis. We are very grateful for detailed advice and discussion regarding this study and the manuscript to Klaus V. Toyka, Christiane Schneider and Marcus Naumann, Department of Neurology, University of Würzburg, Germany.

Table 11Mean changes in MRC sum score during the study period. Note the trend towards mild improvement in all patientsMean changes in muscle strength (all muscles)IVIG-placebo (group 1)Placebo-IVIG (group 2)evaluated by the modified 6-grade MRC sum score and the NSS during the study period (parentheses median)Muscle strength (all muscles) Baseline Month 6137.4 ± 28.3 (145.5) 139.9 ± 30.6 (142.5)141.5 ± 33.8 (152.5) 145.5 ± 26.6 (154.5)Month 12146.7 ± 28.1 (151.5)150.0 ± 25.3 (156.3)Change from baseline to month 6+2.5+4.0Change from month 6 to month 12+6.8+4.5NSSBaseline24.4 ± 10.5 (25.0)29.3 ± 6.9 (31.0)Month 630.6 ± 10.2 (34.5)30.5 ± 6.3 (31.5)Month 1230.0 ± 10.9 (35.3)33.1 ± 4.7 (34.5)Change from baseline to month 6+6.2*+1.2* P < 0.05Change from month 6 to month 12-0.6+2.6*Fig. 2 Fig. 3 Mean changes in NSS sum score during the study period.Note the mild significant improvement during IVIG treatment

Table 22Follow-up of the study patients (mean 15.7 months after end of study): mean changes in the modified 6-grade MRC sum score and in NSSOn treatmentOff treatment(group A, n = 10)(group B, n = 3)BaselineMRC150.4 ± 8.1150.0 ± 25.5NSS30.0 ± 6.129 ± 12Month 12MRC152.7 ± 10.8153.7 ± 26.0NSS34.2 ± 5.533 ± 6Follow-upMRC145.0 ± 18.1137.3 ± 34.7NSS32.5 ± 7.025 ± 15Change from baseline to follow-upMRC-5.6-12.7NSS+2.5-4Change from month 12 to follow-upMRC-7.7-16.3NSS1.7-9

