␣B-Crystallin immunolocalization yields new insights into inclusion body myositis

To study the expression of the small heat shock protein, ␣B-crystallin (␣BC), in inclusion body myositis (IBM). Background: In humans, ␣BC is constitutively expressed in the eye lens, muscle, and heart, but not in lymphoid tissues. Induced expression of ␣BC occurs under metabolic stress, in virus-infected lymphocytes, and in degenerative brain lesions, including neurofibrillary tangles and senile plaques in AD. The previously reported pathologic similarities between AD and IBM prompted us to study ␣BC expression in IBM. Methods: Immunolocalization of ␣BC in muscle of 11 patients with IBM, 50 patients with other muscle diseases, and 4 controls; and quantitative analysis of the frequency of fibers with 1) increased ␣BC expression in IBM and polymyositis and 2) structural abnormality (vacuolated, non-necrotic and invaded by mononuclear cells, Congo red-positive, SMI-31 positive, and ubiquitin positive) in IBM. Results: We detected enhanced expression of ␣BC not only in all structurally abnormal IBM fibers, but also, and with severalfold higher frequency, in IBM fibers without significant structural abnormality (X fibers) ( p values in paired t-tests Ͻ 0.001). We also found enhanced ␣BC in abnormal fibers in other diseases; X fibers, however, were extremely sparse or absent, except in two atypical cases of polymyositis refractory to immunotherapy. Conclusion: That the X fibers are much more frequent than the structurally abnormal fibers in IBM points to a pathogenic stressor acting upstream to the development of structural abnormalities. The identification of this stressor is now of paramount importance for deciphering the enigma of IBM.

The ␣-crystallins are members of the small heat shock protein (Hsp) family that also includes Hsp 20 and Hsp 27. 1,2 The A and B forms of ␣-crystallin, encoded by different genes, are abundant in the eye lens, where they form large multimeric complexes that prevent cataract formation. 1 ␣B-Crystallin (␣BC) is also expressed in other tissues, 3 where it is known to chaperone for actin and desmin filaments, 4 tubulin subunits of microtubules, 5 and a variety of soluble enzymes, 6,7 protecting them from stressinduced damage. 8 Unlike some other heat shock proteins, ␣BC is not constitutively expressed in all tissues. It is present in high concentration in cardiac and skeletal muscle, 4,[9][10][11] where it associates with actin and desmin at the Z-disc. 1,4,8,10 It is expressed at a low level in glial cells in brain, renal epithelial cells, and lung. 3,12 Unlike in other mammalian species, in humans, ␣BC is not normally detected in lymphoid tissues, 13 but its expression in B cells can be induced by viral infections. 13 Consistent with its role as a heat shock protein, ␣BC expression is increased by thermal or osmotic stress. 8,14 In humans, accumulation of ␣BC occurs in glial cytoplasmic inclusions in multiple system atrophy, 15 ballooned neurons in frontotemporal dementia, 16,17 degenerating neurons in progressive supranuclear palsy, 18 cortical Lewy bodies, 12 astrocytic Rosenthal fibers in Alexander's disease, 12 oligodendrocytes in areas of active demyelination in MS, 13 and reactive astrocytes and microglia found in or near senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in AD. 19 The histologic hallmarks of inclusion body myositis (IBM) include the appearance in vacuolated muscle fibers of congophilic inclusions that also bind SMI-31 (an antibody directed against phosphorylated neurofilaments), and abnormal expression in these fibers of ␤-amyloid protein, ␤-amyloid precursor protein, and ubiquitin. 20,21 The vacuolated fibers also express a variety of other proteins normally expressed only at the neuromuscular junction, and in lesions in AD. 20,21 These findings have led to the hypothesis that abnormalities in muscle in IBM are akin to those found in brain in AD. 21 The increased expression of ␣BC in reactive astrocytes and micro-glia near senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in AD prompted us to immunolocalize ␣BC in muscle fibers in IBM.

Methods.

Patients. Limb muscle specimens were obtained from 11 patients with IBM, 50 patients with other muscle diseases, and 4 nonweak controls. Table 1 lists the diagnoses and clinical features of the patients. The diagnoses were based on the clinical examination, family history, EMG, and muscle biopsy studies, which, when appropriate, included immunostains for dystrophin, adhalin, merosin, emerin, desmin, gelsolin, neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM), ␣1-antichymotrypsin, and /m calpain. The histologic criteria for the diagnosis of IBM included fibers harboring rimmed vacuoles, an autoaggressive inflammatory exudate, congophilic and SMI-31-positive inclusions, small or large groups of atrophic fibers, and mitochondrial alterations consisting of ragged-red, raggedblue, and cytochrome c oxidase-negative fibers. [22][23][24][25] The histologic criteria for the diagnosis of polymyositis included an autoaggressive inflammatory exudate and absence of rimmed vacuoles or congophilic inclusions. 26 The histologic criteria for the diagnosis of myofibrillar myopathy included fibers harboring large hyaline structures and lakes of amorphous material; ectopic expression of desmin, gelsolin, ␣1-antichymotrypsin, and NCAM; and the presence of large congophilic deposits in the muscle fibers. 27 Histologically normal muscle specimens from patients without muscle disease were used as controls. All human studies were in accord with the guidelines of the Institutional Review Board of the Mayo Clinic.

Histochemical and immunocytochemical studies. Flashfrozen muscle specimens were stored under liquid nitrogen until use. For conventional histochemical studies, 10-m frozen sections were stained or reacted for hematoxylin and eosin, modified Gomori trichrome, NADH dehydroge-nase, ATPase (after preincubation at pH 4.3, 4.5, and 9.4), acid phosphatase, nonspecific esterase, periodic acid-Schiff (PAS), oil red O, and Congo red. 28 For immunocytochemical studies, 6-m frozen sections were immunostained with the primary antibodies listed in table 2. Nonspecific binding was blocked by preincubation in phosphate-buffered saline, pH 7.4, containing 2% bovine serum albumin and 5% donkey serum or 10% goat serum. The primary antibodies and the corresponding nonimmune immunoglobulin G (IgG) controls were diluted in the blocking solution. Mouse monoclonal antibodies directed against ␣BC, Hsp 65, Hsp 27, and neuronal (nNOS) and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) were localized with the immunoperoxidase method using a biotinylated goat antimouse second antibody and the ABC kit (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA). Ubiquitin, SMI-31, desmin, ␣1antichymotrypsin, and actin were visualized by immunofluorescence with detection of the first antibody by a CY3labeled second antibody, or using a biotinylated second antibody followed by fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)labeled streptavidin. Two-color immunofluorescence studies were done to colocalize ␣BC, detected with a polyclonal rabbit antibody, and desmin, ␣1-antichymotrypsin, and actin, detected with mouse monoclonal antibodies. Controls consisted of replacement of monoclonal antibodies with nonimmune IgG of the same subclass and concentration as the primary antibody, or replacement of polyclonal antibodies with appropriately diluted nonimmune serum. All secondary antibodies were multilabel grade, applied at 5 g/mL, and were from Jackson Immunoresearch (West Grove, PA).

All muscle specimens were immunostained for ␣BC. IBM muscle specimens were immunostained for each antibody listed in table 2. Ubiquitin and SMI-31 were immunolocalized in all polymyositis cases. All muscular dystrophy specimens had been previously immunostained for dystro- phin; laminin-␣-2; ␣, ␤, ␥, and ␦-sarcoglycan; and ␤-dystroglycan. The expression of ␣1-antichymotrypsin, actin, NCAM, and dystrophin was studied in all cases of myofibrillar myopathy.

To correlate the ␣BC positivity with structural changes in the muscle fiber, a section in the series was stained with trichrome. Other sections in the series were reacted for NADH dehydrogenase, ATPase (pH 4.6), or stained with Congo red and viewed under rhodamine optics. 23,29 Quantitative analysis. To evaluate the frequency of ␣BC-positive fibers and of other abnormalities in IBM, all muscle fibers in a trichrome-stained section of each IBM specimen were photographed and counted. A total of 26,863 muscle fibers were surveyed. The following were than counted in serial adjacent or nonadjacent sections: 1) ␣BC-positive fibers; 2) fibers with congophilic inclusions; 3) fibers immunoreactive for SMI-31; and 4) fibers containing ubiquitin-positive deposits. The ␣BC-positive fibers were further classified as follows: i) without significant structural abnormality (we included fibers with a single internal nucleus or a slightly altered intermyofibrillar membranous network in this group); ii) vacuolated; iii) necrotic; iv) regenerating; and v) non-necrotic fibers invaded by mononuclear cells.

In polymyositis, the number of ␣BC-positive fibers was determined semiquantitatively by counting all muscle fibers and all crystallin-positive muscle fibers in four randomly selected low-power fields in each specimen. Altogether, 4848 fibers were surveyed. The ␣BC-positive fibers were subclassified as described above.

Results. Species of ␣BC-positive fibers in muscle. In normal muscle, all fibers show faint ␣BC positivity (figure 1O). ␣BC expression is increased at myomuscular and myotendinous junctions but not at neuromuscular junc-tions. The following patterns of ␣BC expression were observed in biopsy specimens of diseased muscle: 1) fine or coarsely granular deposits, scattered diffusely or aggregated into large clumps, and occupying a variable fraction of the fiber area (see figure 1, A, B, F, and N, and figure 2D); 2) diffuse deposits, occupying all or part of the entire fiber area (see figure 1D and figure 2, E, G, and I); 3) mottled or diffuse deposits in necrotic (see figure 1M) and regenerating fibers; 4) subsarcolemmal accumulations (see figures 1M and 2B); 5) increased expression around vacuoles in vacuolated fibers in IBM (see figure 1I); 6) increased expression in non-necrotic muscle fibers in a mantle-like zone subjacent to invading mononuclear cells (see figure 1K); and 7) fibers displaying a combination of the above patterns (see figure 1I and figure 2, I and K).

Inclusion body myositis. Numerous ␣BC-positive muscle fibers were present in all 11 IBM specimens (figure 1,  A, B, I, and K). The frequency of ␣BC-positive fibers in the individual specimens ranged from 3.2% to 19.8% (figure 3 and table 3). Examination of the ␣BC-positive fibers in adjacent trichrome sections enabled us to classify them as vacuolated (figure 1, H and I), necrotic, regenerating, nonnecrotic and invaded by mononuclear cells (figure 1, H and I), or without significant structural abnormality (figure 1, C to F; figure 3; and table 3). For convenience, from here on ␣BC-positive fibers without significant structural abnormality will be referred to as X fibers. The frequency of the X fibers ranged from 2.6% to 19%, and in each case exceeded the frequency of ubiquitin-, SMI-31-, or Congo red-positive fibers severalfold ( p values based on paired t-tests Ͻ 0.001) (see figure 3 and table 3). It was of interest, however, that those specimens with the highest percentage of X fibers also had the highest percentage of fibers harboring SMI-31-, ubiquitin-, or Congo red-positive deposits (see figure 3). The SMI-31-positive and  ubiquitin-positive fibers were typically vacuolated and structurally abnormal. Colocalization studies in two IBM specimens showed that all SMI-31-positive fibers and some, but not all, ubiquitin-positive fibers were also ␣BCpositive. We detected no correlation between the duration of symptoms or treatment before biopsy and the frequency of ␣BC-positive fibers in individual patients.

Because ␣BC associates with desmin and actin, 4,9,10 we colocalized these proteins with ␣BC by two-color immunofluorescence. The X fibers did not show increased immunoreactivity for desmin or actin. ␣BC can form a multiaggregate complex with Hsp 27, another small heat shock protein. 2,14 However, Hsp 27 expression was not increased in the X fibers.

As previously reported, 30 the expression of Hsp 65 was enhanced in non-necrotic muscle fibers invaded by mononuclear cells in a mantle-like zone subjacent to the invading cells. This pattern of localization is identical to that observed with ␣BC. Apart from the invaded fibers, and specifically in the X fibers, Hsp 65 expression was not

Figure 2. ␣B-Crystallin (␣BC) immunolocalizations. (A, B) Polymyositis. Central hypercontracted fiber seen in trichrome (A) and immunostained (B) sections displays subsarcolemmal ␣BC reactivity. (C, D) Polymyositis. Trichrome (C) and immunostained (D) sections; granular ␣BC deposits appear in structurally abnormal fibers. (E, F) Acute quadriplegic myopathy, immunostained (E) and trichrome (F) sections; ␣BC expression is diffusely increased in the numerous small fibers. (G, H) Dermatomyositis. Immunostained (G) and trichrome (H) sections; diffuse and subsarcolemmal increases of ␣BC occur in the abnormal perifascicular fibers. (I-K) Myofibrillar myopathy. Immunostained (I, K) and trichrome (J) sections. In (I), myriad fibers harbor focal increases of ␣BC. In (K), ␣BC deposits outline hyaline structures, highlight segments of the sarcolemma, and appear in other fiber regions. Compare with adjacent trichrome section (J). (A-H) ϫ 170, (I) ϫ 60, (J, K) ϫ 150.

increased in IBM. The expression of Hsp 70 was increased in invaded, vacuolated, necrotic, and regenerating fibers, but not in X fibers.

Recently, oxidative stress was proposed to play a role in the pathogenesis of IBM. [31][32][33] The evidence for this rests on expression of markers of oxidative stress, nNOS, iNOS, and nitrotyrosine, in the vacuolated fibers. 31,32 We confirmed the increased expression of nNos and iNOS in vacuolated fibers in IBM. Numerous nonvacuolated ␣BC-positive fibers, however, expressed neither nNOS nor iNOS.

Polymyositis. As in IBM, increased ␣BC expression was detected in necrotic and regenerating fibers, nonnecrotic invaded fibers, and fibers without significant structural abnormality (X fibers). In addition, subsarcolemmal ␣BC expression was accentuated in some fibers (figure 2, C and D). In 8 out of 10 patients, the frequency of the X fibers ranged from 0.1% to 1.6% (mean 0.78%). By contrast, in two other patients with atypical polymyositis (see Discussion), the frequency of the X fibers was 27% and 4.9%. Most of these fibers harbored granular ␣BC deposits in a pattern similar to that seen in IBM.

Dermatomyositis. In all five cases of dermatomyositis, ␣BC expression was increased in the abnormal perifascicu-lar fibers, many of which displayed myofibrillar rarefaction, focal basophilia, necrosis, or regeneration (figure 2, G  and H).

Myofibrillar myopathy. Increased ␣BC expression was previously noted in myofibrillar myopathy. 34 The recent discovery of a pathogenic mutation in ␣BC in a myofibrillar myopathy kinship 35 prompted us to study ␣BC expression in six patients with this disease. None of our patients had cataracts, a feature reported in patients with the ␣BC mutation. 36 In all six patients, myriad abnormal muscle fibers reacted intensely for ␣BC (figure 2, I to K). In trichrome sections, the abnormal fibers displayed two more or less distinct types of lesions: hyaline structures, and lakes of amorphous material (see figure 2J). ␣BC outlined the hyaline structures but was absent or only faintly present in their interior (see figure 2K). The nonhyaline lesions reacted intensely for ␣BC (see figure 2K). Colocalization studies showed that the majority of ␣BC-positive regions also reacted for desmin and ␣1-antichymotrypsin. ␣BC was not expressed in structurally normal muscle fibers.

Muscular dystrophies. In four patients with Duchenne dystrophy, five with limb girdle dystrophy (one with attenuated immunoreactivity for members of the sarcoglycan complex), and five with congenital muscular dystrophy (one merosin-negative), hypercontracted fibers showed increased subsarcolemmal ␣BC expression (see figure 1M). Rarely, structurally intact fibers, or fibers with regions that were unevenly stained by trichrome, displayed punctate increases in ␣BC. These fibers represented Ͻ0.1% of the total in any one specimen, and were absent in some specimens. Lobulated fibers, prominent in one patient with limb girdle dystrophy, displayed subsarcolemmal increases in ␣BC.

Mitochondrial myopathy. Increased ␣BC expression was noted in relation to the subsarcolemmal mitochondrial accumulations, as previously reported. 37 Acute quadriplegic myopathy. Numerous small, basophilic fibers reacted diffusely for ␣BC (figure 2, E and F). The pattern of expression resembles that reported with /m calpain in this disease. 23 Type 2 fiber atrophy. Studies of disuse atrophy in the rat model show decreased ␣BC expression in atrophic type 2 fibers. 10 However, glucocorticoid hormones, which frequently cause type 2 fiber atrophy, increase the expression of ␣BC and its mRNA in cultured cells. 38 We therefore studied five patients with type 2 fiber atrophy, three under treatment with prednisone, and two untreated. In one prednisone-treated and one untreated patient, ␣BC expression was prominent in the atrophic type 2 fibers. In the other three patients, the atrophic type 2 fibers were faintly more reactive than type 2 fibers in control muscle. ␣BC expression was not decreased in the atrophic type 2 fibers.

Denervation atrophy. ␣BC expression was strongly enhanced in the center of target formations (see figure 1N), but was not increased in single or grouped atrophic fibers.

Discussion. ␣BC-positive fibers in IBM. Our initial aim was to determine whether ␣BC expression is enhanced in vacuolated muscle fibers in IBM. This was indeed the case, but we also detected enhanced ␣BC expression in many other fibers without signifi-Figure 3. Frequency of different types of fibers in 11 cases of inclusion body myositis. For each patient (represented by a number), the frequency of noninvaded, non-necrotic, and nonvacuolated ␣B-crystallin (␣BC)-positive fibers (X fibers) is severalfold higher than that of fibers that display these abnormalities, contain congophilic inclusions, or are immunostained for ubiquitin or SMI-31. Crys ϭ ␣BC; ϩ ϭ positive; SMI-31 ϭ antibody directed against hyperphosphorylated tau protein. cant structural abnormality (X fibers). Moreover, in each of 11 IBM patients, the frequency of X fibers was severalfold higher than the frequency of any other species of abnormal fibers. Because all vacuolated fibers also show enhanced ␣BC positivity, the enhanced ␣BC expression in the X fibers is likely an upstream event in the pathogenesis of IBM. The X fibers do not express Hsp 65, Hsp 70, or Hsp 27. This suggests that the putative stressor specifically stimulates the expression of ␣BC, rather than inciting a nonspecific heat shock/stress response. Increased oxidative stress was proposed as a mediator of muscle damage in IBM, as shown by expression of markers of oxidative stress (nNOS, iNOS, and nitrotyrosine) in vacuolated fibers. 31,32 However, the X fibers express neither nNOS nor iNOS.

There is experimental evidence that ␣BC expression is enhanced by heat, hypertonic stress, and continuous contractile activity, 39 and by glucocorticoids, 38 prostaglandins, 40 colchicine, 41 and vinblastine. 41 These factors, however, are not likely to operate continuously in most patients with IBM.

␣BC expression is also induced by tumor necrosis factor-␣ (TNF␣). 14 TNF␣-responsive genes are regulated by the nuclear transcription factor B (NF-B). 14 The 5Ј end of the gene encoding ␣BC contains a consensus sequence for NF-B, 14 and ␣BC has been shown to protect cultured cells against TNF␣induced cell death. 42 Increased expression of NF-B was reported in necrotic and vacuolated fibers in IBM, 43 and variably increased levels of TNF␣ mRNA were detected in IBM muscle specimens. 44 However, increased expression of NF-B was not observed in nonvacuolated fibers in IBM 43 ; hence, the increased expression of ␣BC in the X fibers cannot be directly correlated with enhanced expression of NF-B.

The ultrastructural localization of ␣BC in X fibers, and particularly in fibers that just start to overexpress ␣BC, might yield insights into the functional role of ␣BC in IBM. ␣BC, however, is a soluble protein; therefore, its ultrastructural localization in fixed muscle fibers may not yield reliable information as to what organelles it associates with in the native state.

Muscle fibers in IBM were previously shown to express a protein that binds single-stranded DNA. Most of the sites of binding were nuclear, but some were rimmed vacuoles. 45 The identity of this protein is not known, but it is unlikely to be ␣BC, for ␣BC expression in IBM is not selectively enhanced in relation to nuclei and is also observed in numerous nonvacuolated fibers.

Could ␣BC act as an autoantigen in IBM? ␣BC can exist in differentially phosphorylated forms, 46 the degree of phosphorylation depending on stress and on tissue-or age-related factors. [46][47][48] In mice, stress-induced phosphorylation of ␣BC creates epitopes recognized by T cells in the context of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II molecules. 49 Based on studies showing that ␣BC-positive myelin acts as an immunodominant autoantigen to human T cells, 13,49,50 ␣BC has been proposed as a candidate autoantigen in MS. 50 Human lymphocytes do not constitutively express ␣BC and are not tolerized to it. Infection of human peripheral blood B cells with Epstein-Barr virus induces ␣BC expression and results in MHC class II-restricted presentation of ␣BC epitopes to T cells. 13 On this basis, it has been hypothesized that the resulting T cell response is cross reactive with CNS myelin, and could contribute to the development of MS. 13 Although this hypothesis is yet to be confirmed, it raises some intriguing questions: 1) Could a modified form of ␣BC, expressed in muscle, instigate the autoaggressive T cell response in IBM? Consistent with this notion is that fragments of heat shock proteins are among the naturally processed peptides associated with MHC class I molecules on the cell surface. 51 2) We detected X fibers in sporadic IBM; are X fibers also present in hereditary inclusion body myopathy where there is no T-cell response in muscle? Preliminary studies by Sadeh and Argov show that the X fibers are not present in hereditary inclusion body myopathy (personal communication, 1999). 3) If ␣BC instigates a T-cell response in sporadic IBM, then why does the increased expression of ␣BC by numerous degenerating fibers in myofibrillar myopathy not have a similar effect? Possible reasons for this could be that ␣BC accumulating in X fibers in sporadic IBM is structurally different from ␣BC expressed by degenerating fibers in myofibrillar myopathy, or that the cytokine milieu in muscle in the two diseases is different.

␣BC-positive fibers in polymyositis. Increased ␣BC expression in structurally intact fibers (X fibers) is not specific for IBM. In 8 out of 10 polymyositis patients, X fibers were present, but at a much lower frequency, than in IBM. In two patients, however, these fibers were as frequent as in IBM. Although the histologic hallmarks of IBM were absent in these two patients, both were refractory to immunosuppressants and had selectively severe quadriceps weakness. The diagnosis of IBM was suspected, but both declined a second muscle biopsy.

␣BC-positive fibers in other disorders. The increased ␣BC expression in structurally abnormal fibers in myofibrillar myopathy, in myosin-depleted fibers in acute quadriplegic myopathy, and in target formations may be in response to disruption of the myofibrillar architecture. Such a response is consistent with the chaperone role of ␣BC for actin and desmin as well as other proteins, 52 and with the rapid activation of heat shock protein genes by misfolded proteins in tissue culture models. 53 The inciting events leading to increased ␣BC expression in necrotic and regenerating fibers and in the perifascicular degenerating fibers in dermatomyositis are probably varied. Necrotic fibers have undergone marked myofibrillar alterations, regenerating fibers are actively engaged in protein synthesis and folding, and the perifascicular fibers in dermatomyositis are likely metabolically "stressed" by ischemia or other factors. 26 Possible causes and consequences of ␣BC expression in X fibers. The lack of significant structural alteration in the X fibers implies that the increased ␣BC expression in these fibers is an early event in the course of muscle fiber injury. In that case, one can assume that the accumulation of ␣BC is triggered by a yet unidentified stressor, and that the enhanced expression of ␣BC is to protect the muscle fiber from degeneration. It also follows that the unidentified stressor acts on a much larger number of fibers than those that are vacuolated, necrotic, or invaded by mononuclear cells. By analogy to the induced expression of ␣BC in lymphocytes by viral infections, 13 one could speculate that the unidentified stressor represents a viral infection. A search for genomes of mumps virus, 54,55 enterovirus, 56 coxsackie virus, 57 adenovirus, 58 human T-lymphotropic virus (HTLV) types I and II, 58 HIV, 58 and encephalomyocarditis virus 58 was negative in IBM. The HTLV-1 antigen was observed by immunostain in one IBM muscle specimen, 59 but this was not confirmed. 60 Not all viral genomes, however, have been searched for in IBM to date. Moreover, the continued presence of a triggering infectious agent may not be required for disease progression. 61 

Acknowledgment

The authors thank Julie Sauer and Lois Rowe for expert technical assistance.

Supported by USPHS grant NS6277 and a research grant from the Muscular Dystrophy Association.

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. ␣B-Crystallin (␣BC) immunolocalizations. (A-K) Inclusion body myositis. Granular ␣BC deposits appear in numerous fibers in (A) and (B); two of these are vacuolated in (A). Two fibers with markedly enhanced ␣BC expression (D, F) show no significant abnormality in adjacent trichrome sections (C, E). Vacuolated fibers, seen in trichrome (H) and immunostained (I) sections, display granular and perivacuolar ␣BC deposits. Non-necrotic muscle fiber focally surrounded and invaded by mononuclear cells, seen in trichrome (J) and immunostained (K) sections, shows a mantle of ␣BC subjacent to the invading cells. (L, M) Limb-girdle dystrophy. Two necrotic and a hypercontracted fiber are present in trichrome (L) and immunostained (M) sections. The necrotic fibers show faint, mottled ␣BC deposits; the hypercontracted fiber is outlined by intense subsarcolemmal ␣BC reactivity. (N) Intense ␣BC expression in the center of target formations. (O) Faint ␣BC reactivity in normal muscle. (A) ϫ 180, (B) ϫ 225, (C-O) ϫ 185.

Table 11Clinical featuresDiagnosisNo. of casesSex, M/FMean age, y (range)Creatine kinase U/L (range)*Inclusion body myositis †119/266 (50-81)507 (165-1225)Polymyositis ‡102/862 (49-81)967 (127-5360)Dermatomyositis53/258 (29-78)186 (61-391)Duchenne dystrophy43/1 §2.4 (0.8-4)23,941 (10,360-36,000)Congenital muscular dystrophy52/31.8 (0.16-3)1192 (614-2150)Limb girdle dystrophy50/532 (15-43)7536 (74-31,104)Myofibrillar myopathy63/354 (21-71)456 (198-960)Mitochondrial myopathy51/439 (24-49)757 (100-1942)Acute quadriplegic myopathy31/259 (58-70)107 (18-220)Type 2 fiber atrophy53/262 (52-71)101 (28-200)Denervation atrophy22/068 (66-69)576 (200-952)

Table 22Primary antibodiesConcentration/AntigenImmunogenAntibodyCloneSourcedilution␣B-CrystallinBovine eye lensMouse MAB1B6.1-3G4 StressGen1/1000␣B-CrystallinHuman ␣B-crystallin, residues 1-10Rabbit PABNovocastra1/400-1/600SMI-31Phosphorylated neurofilamentMouse MABSternberger1/1000heavy chainMonoclonalUbiquitinPurified bovine red blood cellsMouse MABChemicon1/50Hsp 70Human Hsp 70Mouse MAB5A5Affinity1/100BioreagentsHsp 65M. leprae Hsp 65Mouse MABML-30J. Ivanyi1/100Hsp 27Prokaryote Hsp 27Mouse MABNovocastra1/40-1/100Neuronal nitric oxide synthaseHuman nNOSRabbit PAB16Transduction1/100LaboratoriesInducible nitric oxide synthaseMouse iNOSRabbit PAB6Transduction1/200LaboratoriesDesminWhole human desminMouse MABD33Dako1/400␣1-Antichymotrypsin␣1-AntichymotrypsinMouse MAB8E6Biodesign1/500ActinHuman myocardiumMouse MABHHF35Dako0.2 g/mLMAB ϭ monoclonal antibody; PAB ϭ polyclonal antibody; Hsp ϭ heat shock protein.

Table 33Percentage of abnormal fibers in inclusion body myositisCharacteristicMean Ϯ SE (range)All ␣B-crystallin positive9.8 Ϯ 1.6 (3.2-19.8)␣B-Crystallin positive, nonnecrotic,8.5 Ϯ 1.5 (2.6-19.1)nonvacuolated, noninvaded (X fibers)Congo red positive0.73 Ϯ 0.18 (0.22-2.1)Ubiquitin positive0.70 Ϯ 0.41 (0.66-2.51)SMI-31 positive1.95 Ϯ 0.41 (0.32-4.48)

