

The muscle mitogen-activated protein kinase is altered in sporadic inclusion body myositis

Mian Li, MD, PhD; and Marinos C. Dalakas, MD

Article abstract-Objective: To examine the origin of hyperphosphorylated proteins within the vacuolated myofibers in sporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM) and search for dysregulated intracellular protein phosphorylation. Background: s-IBM is morphologically characterized by primary endomysial inflammation and vacuolated myofibers containing tubulofilaments that originate from cytoskeletal proteins. Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) play a role in regulating phosphorylation and maintaining the stability of the cytoskeletal architecture. Methods: Muscle biopsies from seven patients with s-IBM and 15 controls were examined for the expression of the active components of the various MAPKs, including p44/42MAPK, p38MAPK, p46JNK1, p54JNK2, and p54JNK3, using immunocytochemistry and Western blot analysis. The expression of selected phosphorylated components was also examined in the same specimens. Results: In s-IBM, but not the disease controls, the vacuolated muscle fibers express active p42MAPK but not JNK or p38MAPK. Western blots of cell lysates confirmed the hyperexpression of p42MAPK and demonstrated a novel 35 kD phosphoprotein. Antibodies against phosphoepitopes of the 35 kD protein preferentially immunostained antigens within the vacuolated muscle fibers of s-IBM but not disease controls. Conclusion: In s-IBM, there is increased p42MAPK activation and abnormal intracellular protein phosphorylation with selective accumulation of a 35 kD phosphoprotein within the vacuolated fibers. Although the hyperexpression of 35kD protein may represent cytoskeletal by-products due to heightened p42MAPK activation, its abundant expression only in s-IBM implies that hyperphosphorylated myofibrillar proteins may be involved in the primary disease process. Key words: Muscle mitogen-activated protein kinase-Sporadic inclusion body myositis.

NEUROLOGY 2000;54:1665-1669

Sporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM) is the most common inflammatory myopathy in patients older than 50 years. 1 The morphologic hallmarks of s-IBM include primary endomysial inflammation and vacuolated myofibers containing tubulofilaments that immunoreact for ␤-amyloid precursor protein, apolipoprotein E, hyperphosphorylated microtubuleassociated protein (MAP) tau, and ubiquitin. [2][3][4][5] Although these tubulofilaments 6 and hyperphosphorylated MAP 7 appear to originate from cyto-skeletal components, it is not known if their accumulation reflects a disturbance of intracellular coordinated phosphorylation. This is fundamental because disturbance in coordinated phosphorylation and dephosphorylation, such as amino acid substitutions of conserved serine phosphorylation sites in myosin regulatory light chain, have resulted in impaired muscle function and myopathy. 8,9 Further, regulated phosphorylation of structure proteins in muscle cells is essential in maintaining the stability of cytoskeletal architecture and modulating the dynamics of polymerization and reorganization of myofibrils in both physiologic and pathologic conditions. 10,11 Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) are a group of serine/threonine specific kinases that play a pivotal role in mediating signal transduction from cell surface to either nucleus or cytoskeleton. 12 Upon phosphorylation at both tyrosine and threonine residues by corresponding kinases, they become activated, resulting in further phosphorylation of structure proteins and transcription factors. One of the MAPK pathways involves the p44/42MAPK, which is highly expressed in the mammalian nervous system and the skeletal muscle. A significant proportion of p44/42MAPK binds to microtubules and plays an important role in the regulation of structure and function of cytoskeletal proteins upon mitogen stimulation. 13 Although regulated activation and inactivation of p42MAPK is crucial in the early stages of myogenesis, 14 the role of p42MAPK activation in postmitotic human skeletal myofibers is unclear. The other two prominent members of MAPK are the p38MAPK and c-Jun NH 2 -terminal kinase (JNK), which mediate overlapping, yet distinct, signals with p44/p42MAPK.

To study the myofiber response to undefined cellular insults and gain insight into the mechanism underlying morphologic changes seen in s-IBM, we looked for the expression of active components of MAPKs and searched for dysregulated intracellular protein phosphorylation in the muscle biopsy specimens.

Materials and methods.

We studied muscle biopsy specimens from seven patients, 50 to 70 years old, fulfilling the diagnostic criteria of s-IBM. 2,5 Most of these patients had participated in previous studies, 15 and had an indolent onset of proximal and distal muscle weakness with a steadily progressive course. Their muscle biopsy specimens had endomysial inflammation and several vacuolated fibers per low (200 ϫ magnification) field. For disease controls, we used 15 muscle biopsies from 1) two patients with vacuolar myopathy due to phosphofructokinase deficiency; 2) seven patients with inflammatory myopathy other than s-IBM (two polymyositis, two dermatomyositis, three HIV myositis characterized by endomysial inflammation identical to polymyositis, mitochondrial abnormalities due to zidovudine toxicity, 16 and minivacuolar formation); 3) two patients with denervation characterized by group atrophy and fiber type grouping; 4) one patient with morphologically nonspecific myopathy; and 5) three muscle biopsies with normal morphology from subjects without a muscle disorder. All specimens were processed for immunocytochemistry and Western blot analysis as follows.

Immunocytochemistry. Immunocytochemistry was performed in a conventional indirect immunofluorescence technique, as described. 17 In brief, 6-m-thick serial cryosections were fixed in acetone and incubated at 4 °C overnight with rabbit polyclonal immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies (Vector Laboratory) and peroxidase conjugated streptavidin (Zymed Laboratory). Enhanced chemiluminescence reagent (Amersham; Piscataway, NJ) was used for detection of the immunoreactive bands.

Results. Expression of active p44/42MAPK. In s-IBM, the active p44/42 MAPK was strongly expressed within the muscle fibers that contained vacuoles (figure 1A). The staining was mostly within and surrounding the vacuoles and weakly within some regenerating/degenerating fibers (see figure 1B). There was little or no immunoreactivity of active p44/42MAPK in the muscle fibers of other vacuolar myopathies (see figure 1C) or the normal controls. Among the controls, only some degenerating/regenerating muscle fibers showed immunoreactivity to active p44/42MAPK (see figure 1D). Antibodies against the active p38MAPK or active JNK showed weak or no immunoreactivity within the muscle fibers in all the specimens, without differences between s-IBM or controls (data not shown).

Western blot analysis of cell lysates of the same muscle biopsy specimens showed increased immunoreactivity for the active p42MAPK in s-IBM (lane 2, figure 2A, and lanes 1 through 3, figure 2C) compared with controls (lanes 3 and 4, figure 2A; lane 4, figure 2C). The monoclonal antibody p-JNK (G-7) did not recognize the active JNK in the studied muscles (see figure 2B, lanes 2 through 4), but it did stain the active p46JNK1 from the EGF-treated PC12 cells that we used as a positive control (arrow; lane 1, figure 2B). The expression of active p38MAPK was variable among all the studied specimens by Western blot analysis and not consistently increased in a specific disease (data not shown).

Expression of a 35 kD phosphoprotein. Because many of the cytoskeletal proteins of the myofibers contain phosphoserine, we examined the pattern of phosphoserine immunoreactivity on immunoblots using the polyclonal antibody against phosphoserine in the cell lysates of all the biopsied muscle samples. As shown in figure 3, a strong anti-phosphoserine-reactive band, corresponding to an apparent molecular weight of 35 kD, was noted in the muscle specimens of s-IBM compared with a very weak reaction in the other controls (in figure 3, the arrow shows the band from two of seven representative patients with s-IBM [lanes 1 and 2]; lanes 3 and 4 are other representative

Figure 1. Immunoreactivity to active p44/42MAPK in muscle biopsy specimens from a patient with sporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM) and controls. Polyclonal antibody against phospho-specific p44/42MAPK was applied in an indirect immunofluorescence technique. (A, B) Strong immunoreactivity is present within the vacuolated muscle fibers in s-IBM (A), especially in the peripherally located vacuoles and the vacuolated regenerating fibers (B) (ϫ500 before reduction). (C) Little or no immunoreactivity is present within muscle fibers in vacuolar myopathy due to phosphofructokinase deficiency (ϫ500 before reduction). (D) Strong immunoreactivity is present within some degenerating/regenerating muscle fibers in patients with polymyositis (ϫ500 before reduction). Figure 2. Western blot analysis of active p44/42MAPK (A, C) or active p46JNK1 (B) of whole cell lysates prepared from: PC12 cells treated with epidermal growth factor (EGF) (A, lane 1); muscle biopsy specimens from patients with sporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM) (A, lane 2; C, lanes 1-3); a patient with HIV myositis (A, lane 3); and two normal controls (A, lane 4; C, lane 4). (A) Polyclonal antibodies against

phospho-specific p44/42MAPK recognize active p42MAPK (arrow) in s-IBM (A, lane 2; C, lanes 1-3), compared with the controls (A, lanes 3, 4; C, lane 4). (B) Monoclonal antibody p-JNK (G-7) recognizes the active p46JNK1 from the PC12 cells treated with EGF (arrow, lane 1), but not from the muscle specimens (lanes 2-4). control specimens). This 35 kD protein is heavily phosphorylated on the serine residues as it constitutes a major portion of phosphoserine-containing protein in the whole cell lysate.

Deposits of phosphoproteins within the myofibers of s-IBM. Indirect immunofluorescence analysis using antibodies against phosphoserine showed discrete accumulations of phosphoserine-containing proteins within the vacuolated myofibers (figure 4A). Some weak staining in the periphery of the fiber was also noted. In contrast, little or no phosphoserine immunoreactivity within the muscle fibers was noted in the other myopathies (figure 4B).

Discussion. Within the vacuolated muscle fibers of patients with s-IBM, but not the other vacuolar or inflammatory myopathies, we found hyperexpression of active p42MAPK, suggesting heightened p42MAPK activation cascade. Given the abundance of the 35 kD phosphoprotein analyzed by Western blotting and its specific localization seen by immuno-cytochemistry, it is very likely that the 35 kD phosphoprotein may originate from the cytoskeleton. The high expression of the 35 kD phosphoprotein within the muscle fibers of s-IBM may be due either to its hyperphosphorylation on multiple serine residues at post-translational level or potentially to upregulation at transcriptional level by the p42MAPK activation. Because both the 35 kD phosphoprotein and the active p42MAPK were hyperexpressed within the vacuolated muscle fibers only in s-IBM but not the other vacuolar myopathies, the abnormal phosphorylation of cytoskeletal proteins is probably connected to the underlying cause of s-IBM and may not be a nonspecific consequence of the vacuolar formation or a cytoskeletal by-product of the heightened p42MAPK activation. In addition to the 35 kD protein, other phosphoproteins were upregulated in the diseased muscles compared with the subjects, but they did not correlate to a specific disease process.

In cycling cells such as fibroblasts, or postmitotic cells such as neurons and myofibers, a significant proportion of p42MAPK is physically associated with microtubules. 13 MAP-2, MAP-4, and tau are the substrates of p44/42MAPK, and prolonged activation of p42MAPK has been implicated in the pathogenesis of neurofibrillar tangle formation and tau hyperphosphorylation in neurodegenerative disorders. 20 Because in adult skeletal muscle the microtubules are essential in maintaining the highly organized structure of the sarcomere and the assembly of the thick filaments, 21 the hyperexpression of active p42MAPK in s-IBM and the selective accumulation of phosphoproteins within the vacuolated fibers suggest an ongoing cytoskeletal disruption with intracellular accumulation of hyperphosphorylated microtubular proteins. An example of vacuolar formation due to instability of cytoskeletal architecture in the muscle is the vacuolar myopathy due to myotoxic effects of colchicine. 22 In physiologic conditions, active p44/42MAPK can promote cell growth, which may account for the increased expression of the active p44/42MAPK we noted in regenerating muscle fibers in patients with s-IBM or polymyositis. Dysregulated MAPK pathway, conversely, may be connected to cell degeneration. Although the intracellular and extracellular

Figure 3. Western blot analysis of whole cell lysates from muscle biopsy specimens using polyclonal antibodies against phosphoserine (antiphosphoserine). The samples are from patients with sporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM) (lanes 1-2), HIV myositis (lane 3), and normal control (lane 4). A strong band representing phosphoserine-containing protein of an apparent molecular weight 35 kD is evident (arrow) in the specimens from patients with s-IBM (lanes 1-2). Figure 4. Indirect immunofluorescence of muscle biopsy specimens from a patient with sporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM) and control. (A, B):

Polyclonal antibody against phosphoserine shows discrete focal deposits of phosphoserine-containing epitopes within the vacuoles in s-IBM (A) (ϫ300 before reduction); trichrome staining of consecutive muscle section is shown in the insets. Phosphoserine immunoreactivity is also present in the membrane of some myofibers. (B) Little or no phosphoserine immunoreactivity within the muscle fibers is seen in a control (ϫ200 before reduction).

factors leading to the characteristic morphologic changes of skeletal muscle in s-IBM remain unclear, the accumulation of phosphoserine within the vacuolated muscle fibers and the hyperexpression of the 35 kD phosphoprotein may be the impetus to explore the biochemical origin of the tubulofilamentous accumulations. Various immune mediators that are upregulated in the muscles of patients with s-IBM 23 can also lead to p42MAPK activation and may serve as triggering factors for the p42MAPK activation cascade. These factors include cytokines, such as TGF-␤1, 24 amino-terminal fragments of secreted ␤-APP, 25 fibronectin, 26 integrins, 27 and perforin or granzyme B released by the autoinvasive cytotoxic CD8 ϩ T cells, 28 and metalloproteinases. 29 

Acknowledgment

The authors thank Drs. Wei Chen and Semino-Mora Cristina for technical help.

