Inclusion body myositis associated with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)

Letters and Case Reports

Inclusion body myositis associated with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)

Muscle disease is well recognised in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and 'SIX myositis' refers to SLE with clinical features of polymyositis, but normal serum muscle enzymes, electromyogram, and muscle biopsy.' Inclusion body myositis (IRM) is a distinct entity with characteristic clinical and histopathological features, which is usually unresponsive to immunosuppressive therapy. There is one previous report of a patient with IRM who ten years later developed SIX.' We describe a patient with SLE and a past history of successfully treated S1.E myositis who two decades later developed IBM.

In 1978 a 31-year-old man presented with an 11 week history of polyarthritis, myalgia, and Raynaud's phenomenon. Examination revealed fever, malar rash, symmetrical small joint synovitis, and proximal muscle weakness. Complete blood examination, biochemistry and urinalysis were normal. T h e erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 74 mmihour and creatine kinase (CK) 44 U L (20-1 10). Immunological testing revealed antinuclear antibody (ANA) > 1:640 speckled, antibodies to double stranded DNA (ADNA) > 1 10 IUimL (0-25), total haemolytic complement two microns.) (0.2-0.5), rheumatoid factor negative. Open deltoid muscle biopsy was normal under light and electron microscopy.

He was treated for SLE myositis (azathioprine 100 mg/day and tapering prednisolone for five years) with complete recovery and subsequently maintained in remission with hydroxychloroyuine 400 mglday.

In 1998 he described difficulty climbing stairs. Examination revealed isolated weakness (four of five) of hip flexioniextension. The ESR was 10 mmihour, Creactive protein <1 mg/L, ANA 1:2560, centromere pattern, ADNA 5 IU/mL (4), normal serum complements, C K 2192 U/L (0-270), and thyroid stimulating hormone 1.9 mIU/L (0.4-4.5). Antibodies to extractable nuclear antigens were not detected. Open biopsy of the vastus lateralis muscle showed an inflammatory myopathy, with rimmed vacuoles in muscle fibres and the ultrastructural findings of membranous whorls and abnormal 15 nm filamentous material characteristic of inclusion body myositis fFigure la, b). He was treated with intramuscular methotrexate 25 mgheek, azathioprine 50 mg/day and tapering prednisolone. By one year there was neither IBM is distinguished from polymyositis clinically by more frequent asymmetric and distal muscle involvement, and histologically by an endomysial chronic inflammatory cell infiltrate, fibre necrosis and atrophy, with cytoplasmic inclusions and rimmed vacuoles in muscle fibres. Electron microscopy shows intranuclear and cytoplasmic tubulofilamentous inclusions which are considered to resemble the filaments of Alzheimer's disease,' and the vacuoles contain proteins including B amyloid. The similarities suggest an as yet unexplained link to Alzheimer's disease.

Weakness confined to the hip muscles, as in this case, is atypical for IBM, which characteristically affects the long finger flexors, knee extensors, and is usually associated with dysphagia.' The lack of progression during the year of treatment with methotrexate, azathioprine and prednisolone implies that the condition has been stabilised, as may occur with immunotherapy in a small proportion of patients with IBM.

It is tempting to speculate that the initial presentation of this patient with SLE rnyositis was in fact undiagnosed IBM, however, careful re-examination of the tissue did not reveal any supportive features. This is the first report of IBM in a patient with SLE.

The evidence for IBM being an autoimmune disease of muscle is sparse. IBM has been reported in one patient who ten years after diagnosis developed SLE' and has been observed in other autoimmune diseases (Sjogren's syndr~rne,~ scleroderma,6 and immune thrombocytopenia'), Immunological aberrance may be implicated in the pathogenesis of IBM and we report one further case of IBM developing in an autoimmune milieu.

Aust NZ J Med 2000; 30 V. LIMAYE, Rheumatology Registrar, The Queen Elizabeth Hospital, G. SCOTT, Pathologist, Institute of Medical and Veterinary Science, R. KWIATEK, Visiting Rheumatologist, The Queen Elizabeth Hospital, K. PILE, Director, Rheumatology, University of Adelaide, The Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Adelaidc, SA. Date of submission: 4 January 2000

Figure la :Figure 16 :la16Figure la: Electron micrograph of sarcoplasmic vacuole showing membranous, whorled material. (Bar equals

