Prevalence of sporadic inclusion body myositis in Western Australia

A 10-year retrospective review was conducted to ascertain the prevalence of inclusion body myositis (IBM) in Western Australia. Seventeen patients with sporadic IBM aged 45-90 years were identified and the prevalence of IBM was calculated to be 9.3 × 10 −6 . The prevalence was higher in men (10.9 × 10 −6 ) than in women (7.7 × 10 −6 ). The mean age of onset of IBM was 56.6 years, and the mean delay between onset of symptoms and diagnosis was 4.4 years. The age-adjusted prevalence over the age of 50 years was 35.3 × 10 −6 . The results suggest a higher prevalence of IBM than has previously been reported.

Inclusion body myositis (IBM) is a slowly progressive form of inflammatory myopathy typified by the presence of distinctive muscle fiber inclusions. Clinically, there is a selective pattern of muscle involvement including the quadriceps femoris muscles in the lower limbs and the distal upper limb muscles, but atypical cases with a more proximal or asymmetric pattern of muscle weakness also occur. 7,8 Histologically, there are microtubular filamentous inclusions, rimmed vacuoles containing ␤-amyloid and other proteins, and CD8 + T cells and macrophages which invade non-necrotic muscle fibers. 1,3,9 It has been estimated that approximately one-third of patients with inflammatory myopathy referred to a neuromuscular clinic have IBM, 4 and IBM has been regarded as the most common acquired progressive myopathy in patients over the age of 50 years. 10 However, few population studies have been performed to examine the epidemiology of IBM. 2,7 We report here the results of a 10-year retrospective review of all known cases of IBM in Western Australia to ascertain the prevalence of the condition.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Information on patients with IBM was collected from a number of sources. All patients with IBM referred to a specialized neuromuscular clinic for patients with inflammatory myopathy at the Australian Neuromuscular Research Institute (ANRI) over a 10-year period were included in the analysis. In addition, a detailed search of muscle biopsy reports for the previous 10 years was conducted at the pathology laboratories of the three West Australian metropolitan teaching hospitals: Royal Perth Hospital, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, and Fremantle Hospital. Finally, a questionnaire was sent to all neurologists and rheumatologists in Western Australia to identify known cases of IBM.

The diagnosis of IBM was based upon the following combination of clinical and laboratory criteria as proposed by Griggs et al. 5 : slowly progressive weakness of more than 6 months duration; age of onset greater than 30 years; involvement of both proximal and distal limb muscles with weakness including fin-ger flexors, wrist flexors more than wrist extensors, or quadriceps femoris; serum creatine kinase activity less than 12 times normal; and electromyographic findings consistent with an inflammatory myopathy (including fibrillation potentials and polyphasic motor unit action potentials of short, long, or mixed duration). In all cases, the diagnosis was confirmed pathologically by the finding of features of an inflammatory myopathy with mononuclear cell invasion of non-necrotic muscle fibers, the presence of rimmed vacuoles, and amyloid deposits or 15-18 nm tubulofilamentous inclusions in muscle fibers. Cases fulfilling all of these histological criteria were classified as definite IBM, whereas those in which the muscle biopsy showed features of an inflammatory myopathy but without all of the other pathological features were classified as possible IBM.

All patients fulfilling the above criteria who were alive at the population census date of 30 June 1998 were included in the analysis. Patients with clinical features compatible with IBM but who had not been fully investigated, or in whom the muscle biopsy findings were inconclusive, were not included. Population statistics for the State of Western Australia as calculated by the Australian Bureau of Statistics at 30 June 1998 were used to calculate the prevalence rate of IBM.

RESULTS

A total of 17 patients were identified, 13 fulfilling the criteria for definite IBM and 4 for possible IBM. Each of the latter 4 patients had an inflammatory myopathy with rimmed vacuoles and fulfilled the clinical and other laboratory criteria for IBM; they were therefore included in the analysis. The prevalence of IBM was calculated to be 9.3 × 10 −6 using the total population of Western Australia of 1,831,399. There were 10 men and 7 women (ratio 1.4:1); using population figures adjusted for sex, the prevalence was 10.9 × 10 −6 for males and 7.7 × 10 −6 for females. The age range of affected individuals was 45-90 years and the disease duration ranged from 2-20 years. Using patient and population numbers for people aged 50 years or over, the prevalence was 35.3 × 10 −6 .

The mean age of onset of IBM was lower in women than men, being 49.8 years (range 37-56 years) and 60.0 years (range 32-83 years), respectively. The time period between onset of symptoms and diagnosis of IBM was similar for both women and men, the mean delay being 4.4 years (range 1-9 years). At the census date, the mean duration of dis-ease was 9.7 years (range 2-20 years). No cases of familial IBM were identified.

During the same period, 29 patients with polymyositis and 25 patients with dermatomyositis were referred to the Neuromuscular Clinic at the ANRI.

DISCUSSION

There have been few previous population-based studies to determine the prevalence of IBM. Lindberg et al. 7 reported a series of 18 cases of IBM, 10 of whom were resident in Go ¨teborg, and established an annual incidence of 2.2 × 10 −6 per year, but they did not carry out a population prevalence study. The only systematic population study has been that performed by Badrising et al. 2 in the Netherlands, which estimated a prevalence of 4.3 × 10 −6 , which is lower than that found in the present study. However, this figure was considered by the authors to be an underestimate due to incomplete ascertainment in a number of provinces and to the exclusion of cases with typical clinical features of IBM but not conforming to the full histopathological criteria.

In the present study, we have used the diagnostic criteria recommended by Griggs et al. 5 based upon a combination of clinical, histopathological, and other laboratory findings. Although 4 of our cases would be classified as "possible" IBM according to these criteria, the characteristic pattern of muscle involvement and the presence of both inflammatory changes and rimmed vacuole formation in the muscle biopsies strongly suggest a diagnosis of IBM in these cases; they have therefore been included in the estimate of prevalence.

In Western Australia, patients with progressive myopathic disorders such as IBM are usually referred to a neurologist or rheumatologist for investigation and, at some stage, would have a muscle biopsy. Such biopsies are processed in the pathology department of one of the three general metropolitan teaching hospitals that provide a service to the inner and outer suburbs of Perth as well as more remote country areas. At some stage, most patients with IBM and other inflammatory myopathies are referred to the ANRI, which has had a specialized Neuromuscular Clinic for patients with inflammatory myopathies for the past 10 years. With the possible exception of some cases from the more remote areas of the state, the procedures used to identify cases of IBM in the present study are therefore likely to have ascertained the majority of diagnosed cases of IBM in Western Australia. Because of the chronicity of the condition and the long interval between the onset of symptoms and confirmation of the diagnosis (average 4.4 years), it is however likely that there are as yet undiagnosed or asymptomatic cases of IBM in the community and that the estimated prevalence of 9.3 × 10 −6 represents an underestimate of the true prevalence of the condition. Further population studies are required to determine how much variation exists in the prevalence of IBM in different communities as well as other aspects of the epidemiology of this condition.

Comparative prevalence data for the other inflammatory myopathies are not available for the population of Western Australia. However, based upon the numbers of patients with polymyositis or dermatomyositis referred to the Neuromuscular Clinic at the ANRI during the period of the review, and from data for other communities, 6 it seems likely that the prevalence of these conditions is higher than that of IBM.

This work was supported by the Neuromuscular Foundation of Western Australia.The authors acknowledge Professor B.A. Kakulas and Dr. P. Jacobsen, Department of Neuropathology, Royal Perth Hospital; Dr. P. Robbins, PathCentre, Queen Elizabeth II Medical Centre; Dr. R. Glancy, Department of Pathology, Fremantle Hospital; and neurologists and rheumatologists in Perth for their contribution to the ascertainment of cases of IBM.

