Redox factor-1 in muscle biopsies of patients with inclusion-body myositis

To determine whether redox factor-1 (Ref-1) participates in the pathogenesis of inclusion-body myositis (IBM), we immunolocalized Ref-1 in muscle biopsies of IBM patients by light-and electron-microscopy. Approximately 70±80% of the IBM vacuolated muscle ®bers had focal inclusions strongly immunoreactive for Ref-1. By immunoelectronmicroscopy, Ref-1 was localized to paired-helical ®laments, 6±10 nm amyloid-like ®brils and amorphous material. Virtually all regenerating and necrotic muscle ®bers in various muscle biopsies had diffusely strong Ref-1 immunoreactivity. At all neuromuscular junctions, postsynaptically there was strong Ref-1 immunoreactivity. Our study suggests that Ref-1 plays a role in IBM pathogenesis, and in other pathologic and normal processes of human muscle.

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (IBM) is the most common, progressive and debilitating muscle disease of older persons (reviewed in [2]). Pathologic features of IBM muscle biopsies include vacuolated muscle ®bers (VMFs), congo-red positivity (indicating amyloid) within the VMFs, 15±21 nm cytoplasmic paired-helical ®laments (PHFs), and various degree of mononuclear-cell in¯ammation [2]. A remarkable feature of IBM-VMFs is the presence of a group of proteins that are accumulated in the brain of Alzheimer disease (AD) [2]. These include amyloid-b precursor protein (AbPP), including its epitope amyloid-b (Ab) [4], presenilin-1 [6], apolipoprotein E and several other `Alzheimer-characteristic' proteins [2]. Like in AD brain, IBM muscle PHFs contain phosphorylated tau [11], while Ab accumulates in 6±10 nm amyloid-like ®brils [4]. Oxidative stress, in association with muscle aging, has been postulated to play an important role in IBM pathogenesis [3]. Markers of oxidative stress in IBM include accumulation within IBM-VMFs of: (1) inducible and neuronal nitric oxide synthases and nitrotyrosine [19], (2) malondialdehyde, an indicator of lipid peroxidation [3], (3) p50 and p65 components of nuclear factor kB (NF-kB) [20] and (4) superoxide dismutase 1, seleno-glutathione peroxidase, catalase and their respective mRNAs [3].

Redox factor-1 (Ref-1), also known as APE or HAP1, is a 37 kDa protein possessing apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease activity [16,17]. It is considered to play an important role in gene regulation and DNA repair [17]. Ref-1 in¯uences gene transcription by regulating the reduction/oxidation state of conserved cysteine residues in the DNAbinding domain of the activator protein-1 (AP-1), a dimeric complex formed by components of the Jun and Fos families of transcription factors [1,16,17]. Through the reduction of sulfhydryl groups, Ref-1 increases the af®nity of the AP-1 complex to its binding sites in the promoter region of several genes, modulating their transcription [1]. By a similar mechanism, Ref-1 promotes DNA binding of the transcription factor NF-kB [12]. Oxidative stress has been shown to induce Ref-1 activation. For example, in vitro, both Ref-1 and its mRNA are induced by reactive oxygen species (ROS) and ROS generators, such as ionizing radiation [14]. In vivo, in the brain of young rats Ref-1 expression is stimulated by exposure to isobaric hyperoxia [9].

In vivo, by immunocytochemistry, Ref-1 has a different pattern of expression in different cells and organs [8]. In vitro, in unstimulated cells Ref-1 is located on the inner part of the nuclear membrane and in the cytoplasm [14,17]. When the cells are stimulated, Ref-1 translocates into the nucleus [14]. Ref-1 reportedly is present constitutively in a subpopulation of neurons in human brain, and in other organs including skin, liver, and duodenum [8]. In AD brain, Ref-1 has been immunolocalized in a sub-population of senile plaques, suggesting a functional relationship between Ref-1 and Ab, possibly a role of Ref-1 in Ab accumulation [15].

To determine whether Ref-1 plays a role in IBM pathogenesis, we immunostained, according to our techniques [4,6,7,11], 10 mm transverse sections of freshly-frozen diagnostic muscle biopsies from eight IBM patients. We utilized a speci®c rabbit polyclonal antibody against the carboxy terminus epitope of human Ref-1 [10] (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc., Santa Cruz, CA), diluted 1:50. Controls were: muscle biopsies of three peripheral neuropathies, four amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, two myotonic dystrophy, two polymyositis, two dermatomyositis, two morphologically non-speci®c myopathies, one mitochondrial myopathy and three normal patients. Diagnosis was based on clinical and laboratory studies, including our 18-reaction diagnostic histochemistry on muscle biopsies. Double immunolocalization studies utilized polyclonal anti-Ref-1 antibody in combination with either: (1) mouse monoclonal antibody SMI-31 (Sternberger Monoclonals Inc., Baltimore, MD), recognizing phosphorylated tau on IBM-PHFs [11]  Controls for staining speci®city were: (a) omission of the primary antibody, or (b) its replacement with a non-immune serum or irrelevant antibodies, as described [4,6,7,11]. To block non-speci®c binding of antibody to Fc receptors, sections were preincubated with normal goat serum diluted 1:10 [4, 6,7,11].

Immuno-electronmicroscopy (immuno-EM) was performed as described previously [4,6,11].

In all muscle biopsies, Ref-1 was immunolocalized along the myonuclear membrane and was slightly more strongly expressed in type-II than in type-I muscle ®bers.

By light microscopy, approximately 70±80% of IBM-VMFs, and some of the non-VMFs, had Ref-1 immunoreactivity in the form of squiggly, linear, and plaquette-like inclusions (Fig. 1). Ref-1 immunoreactive inclusions colocalized with SMI-31 and Ab immunoreactivity (Fig. 1).

By immuno-EM utilizing horseradish peroxidase, Ref-1 was localized to the PHFs, covering them entirely (Fig. 2A). By gold-immuno-EM, Ref-1 was mostly attached to the PHFs by very thin, short threads (Fig. 2B). Ref-1 was also localized to 6±10 nm amyloid-like ®brils and to amorphous material (Fig. 2C).

In all myopathies, regenerating and necrotic muscle ®bers had strong and diffuse Ref-1 immunoreactivity (Fig. 3). Double labeling with the macrophage marker Ber MAC3 showed that in necrotic ®bers Ref-1 immunoreactivity did not co-localize with the Ber MAC3 immunoreactivity.

In all muscle biopsies, Ref-1 immunoreactivity was present at the postsynaptic domain of the neuromuscular junctions (NMJs), where it co-localized with bound abungarotoxin (Fig. 3). However, immunoreactivity for Ref-1 appeared slightly wider and deeper in the ®ber than the area occupied by bound a-bungarotoxin.

Either omitting the primary antiserum or its replacement with non-immune or irrelevant antisera produced negative results.

Our study demonstrates for the ®rst time that Ref-1 participates in pathologic processes affecting human skeletal muscle. In IBM, overexpression of Ref-1 may: (a) result from oxidative stress, markers of which we have previously demonstrated; and (b) be functionally related to the overexpression of transcription factor NF-kB [20]. For example, in vitro, Ref-1 stimulates the DNA-binding activity of a recombinant p50 component of NF-kB [12]. Accordingly, in IBM Ref-1 might modulate the DNA-binding activity of NF-kB, and possibly of other transcription factors, such as AP-1. c-Jun and c-Fos components of the AP-1 complex appear to be increased in IBM muscle ®bers (Broccolini and Askanas, 1999, unpublished observation). The promoter region of the AbPP gene contains speci®c recognition sequences for transcription factors NF-kB and AP-1 [13], and AbPP mRNA is increased in IBM-VMFs [2,3]. This mechanism might be involved in the increased AbPP gene transcription in IBM.

In IBM abnormal muscle ®bers, Ref-1 immunolocalizes to (a) PHFs containing phosphorylated tau and (b) 6±10 nm amyloid-like ®brils and amorphous material, both containing Ab.

Because Ref-1 immunoreactivity appears to be attached to the PHFs by thin threads, it is possible that this results from its association with another PHFs-binding protein.

Proteins related to oxidative stress that are present on IBM-PHFs include nitrotyrosine and NF-kB [19,20]. Moreover, IBM-PHFs contain RNA and the RNA-binding protein, survival motor neuron (SMN) [7]. Therefore, the presence of Ref-1 on IBM-PHFs might be related to its role in either oxidative stress or in aberrant transcription, or both.

Ref It has been previously demonstrated that Ref-1 expression is developmentally regulated [18]. However, its possible role in cellular development and regeneration is not yet  

understood. The increased expression of Ref-1 in regenerating muscle ®bers suggests its possible role in human muscle growth and development.

The cause of Ref-1 overexpression in human necrotic ®bers and its role in muscle-®ber necrosis are not known. Since NF-kB is also upregulated in human necrotic muscle ®bers [20], the possibility exists that the same stimulatory mechanism, for example oxidative stress that is probably present in necrotic muscle ®bers, may upregulate both Ref-1 and NF-kB.

Our novel localization of Ref-1 at the postsynaptic domain of human NMJs suggests that Ref-1 may in¯uence transcription of genes there such as AbPP. Postsynaptic accumulation of at least 14 proteins and the mRNAs of some of them, including AbPP, has been shown at human NMJs [5].

Supported in part by grants from the NIH (NS 34103 and AG 16768) and the Muscular Dystrophy Association (to V.A.). A.B. is a postdoctoral research fellow in Dr Askanas' laboratory. Maggie Baburyan provided excellent assistance in electronmicroscopy and photography.

diluted 1 :11000; (2) mouse monoclonal antibody 6E10, recognizing aminoacid residues 1±17 of human amyloid-b peptide (Senetek, Maryland Heights, MO) diluted 1:100; (3) mouse monoclonal antibody against desmin (Zymed, San Francisco, CA) diluted 1:20, which is highly expressed in human regenerating muscle ®bers; or (4) mouse monoclonal antibody against human macrophages (clone Ber MAC3, DAKO, Carpenteria, CA) diluted 1:10. The postsynaptic domain of neuromuscular junctions (NMJs) was visualized by the binding of a-bungarotoxin conjugated with Alexae ¯uorochrome (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR).

Fig. 1 .1Fig. 1. Double label immuno¯uorescence illustrating close colocalization between Ref-1 and SMI31 (A,B) and Ref-1 and Ab (C,D). £900.

-1 co-localization with Ab immunoreactivity and its presence on Ab-containing amyloid-like ®brils in IBM may indicate that (a) Ref-1 participates in Ab deposition, or (b) accumulated Ab induces oxidative stress leading to induction of Ref-1.

Fig. 3 .3Fig. 3. Double label immuno¯uorescence. (A,B) Regenerating muscle ®bers. Ref-1 (A) is strongly expressed in two, highlighted by desmin (B), regenerating muscle ®bers. (C) Ref-1 immunoreactive necrotic muscle ®ber is desmin negative (D). (E,F) Two normal neuromuscular junctions. E, Ref-1; F, a-bungarotoxin (a-BT) bound to the postsynaptic nicotinic acetylcholine receptor. There is a colocalization between Ref-1 and a-BT, with Ref-1 seeming to occupy a slightly larger territory. £800.

Fig. 2 .2Fig. 2. Immunoelectronmicroscopy. (A) Low magni®cation of horseradish-peroxidase staining illustrating localization of Ref-1 to paired helical ®laments. An adjacent portion of the myo®ber (below) is not immunostained. (B,C) Gold immunostaining using 5 nm gold particles. In (B) Ref-1 is localized to paired helical ®laments, while in (C) gold particles are localized to amorphous material and 6±10 nm amyloid-like ®brils. (A) £11 000; (B,C) £110 000. Bars represent 1 mm in (A) and 0.1 mm in (B,C).

