Partial laminin ?2 chain deficiency in a patient with myopathy resembling inclusion body myositis

To clarify the mechanism of brain impairment in Rett syndrome, we measured the cerebrospinal fluid levels of ␤-phenylethylamine (PEA) in 17 patients with Rett syndrome. Findings were compared with those obtained in age-matched controls and diseased controls. The cerebrospinal fluid level of PEA was significantly lower in patients with Rett syndrome than in the controls (31% of control values). The alteration in the cerebrospinal fluid level of PEA may reflect dopamine system impairment in Rett syndrome.

Previous studies revealed alterations of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biogenic amines. 4 However, the alterations remain controversial. 6 No consistent biological findings of biogenic amine dysfunction have been established.

␤-Phenylethylamine (PEA) is an endogenous amine synthesized by decarboxylation of phenylalanine in dopaminergic neurons of the nigrostriatal system [7][8][9].

The role of PEA in human brain has been examined in various neuropsychiatric disorders. Human CSF levels of PEA reflect the brain PEA levels. 10 However, PEA has not been studied previously in RS.

We compared the CSF levels of PEA in girls with RS and normal control subjects and disease controls.

Patients and Methods

Clinical diagnosis of RS was confirmed in 17 patients according to the Rett Syndrome Diagnostic Criteria Work Group. 1 We measured CSF PEA levels in 17 children with RS and in 13 control children with no neurological disease. CSF levels of PEA were also determined in patients with other neurological diseases, including 4 patients with epilepsy and mental retardation and 5 patients with autistic disorder. The 17 RS children included 9 in stage II, 7 in stage III, and 1 in stage IV (mean age, 52.7 Ϯ 27.4 months). None of the RS children had received antiparkinsonian drugs, naltrexone, or neuroleptic agents that might have affected the CSF PEA levels (Table 1). The written informed consent was obtained from each patient's parents. Lumbar puncture was performed between 10:00 AM and 12:00 noon without local or general anesthesia. A 2-ml aliquot of CSF was used for the cell count and for measurements of glucose and protein. An additional 1 ml was immediately frozen and stored at Ϫ80°C for the assay of PEA levels. We used 13 age-matched low-risk children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia without central nervous system signs before commencing treatment as controls. It is known that the monoamine system is intact and CSF metabolites are not changed in these children before treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia is begun. 11 The mean age of control subjects was 84.2 Ϯ 39.2 months. We used 4 children with epilepsy and mental retardation as disease controls. The mean age of 4 children with epilepsy and mental retardation and the 5 children with autistic disorder were 87.0 Ϯ 47.0 and 53.8 Ϯ 11.3 months, respectively.

Extraction and Derivatization

The extraction of PEA from CSF was performed by a method described previously. 12 Samples of 1 ml CSF were placed in silicon coated tubes. Then 1 ng of D4-PEA (MSD Isotope, Montreal, Quebec, Canada) was added to each tube as an internal standard. In addition, 30 l of Ringer's solution was added to each of four tubes. Then, 30, 100, 300, and 1,000 pg of PEA were each added to the four tubes as standard. All samples were kept at 0°C for 20 minutes to equilibrate. Following the addition of 50 l of 6N NaOH, CSF was applied to an Extrelut column (1 cm internal diameter, 7 cm; Merck, Damstadt, Germany) for 5 minutes, and was eluted with 7 ml ethylacetate. The eluate was collected in a tube containing 100 l of 1 mM HCl before evaporation so as not to evaporate PEA by a concentrator (Savant, Farmingdale, NJ). The residue was derivatized with 50 l of pentafluoropropionate (PFP) anhydride at 60°C for 20 minutes. The solvent was evaporated to dryness with dry nitrogen gas, and the sample was reconstituted with 20 l of ethylacetate. Sample volumes of 2 l were injected into gas chromatography-chemical ionization-mass spectrometry (GC/CI/MS). The double-focused mass spectrometer was interfaced with a data acquisition system (Hitachi M-80B, Hitachi City, Japan). Isobutane was used as the reagent gas (source pressure, 3 ϫ 10 Ϫ6 torr). Helium was used as the GC carrier gas (40 ml/min). The oven temperature was maintained isothermally at 115°C. The mass numbers used for quantitative analysis were mo/z 268 corresponding to PEA-PFP and m/z 272 corresponding to D4-PEA-PFP. Peak area measurement was used for the estimation of ion currents. The calibration curve was highly correlated in standard samples (r ϭ 0.98) in the range of 30 to 1,000 pg/ml PEA.

We also measured the CSF levels of homovanillic acid (HVA), and 3-methoxy-4-hydroxy-phenylethylene glycol (MHPG) by using our previously described methods. [13][14][15] Data are summarized as mean Ϯ standard deviations. For statistical analysis, we used analysis of variance. If the data differences were significant, we applied the Student's t test for comparing group means. p Ͻ 0.05 was considered significant.

Results

Both control and RS samples had normal CSF findings for standard parameters. No difference was noted in PEA levels according to sex among the age-matched and disease controls. The mean CSF level of PEA in patients with RS (287.2 Ϯ 285.9 pg/ml) was significantly lower than that of controls (936.2 Ϯ 519.2 pg/ ml), being 31% of control values ( p Ͻ 0.05). The CSF PEA levels of the patients with stage II RS (n ϭ 9; age, 34.6 Ϯ 9.2 months), patients with stage III (n ϭ 7; age, 64.1 Ϯ 7.7 months) and 1 patient with stage IV (age, 137.0 months) were 187.5 Ϯ 158.7, 417.0 Ϯ 387.1, and 276.3 pg/ml, respectively (see Table 1). The mean CSF levels of PEA by group are shown in Table 2. The CSF PEA levels in stage II were signifi-   cantly lower than those in stage III ( p Ͻ 0.05). The mean CSF levels of PEA in children with epilepsy and mental retardation or autistic disorder were not significantly different from controls with no neurological disease (see Table 2). The levels of HVA in subjects with RS (n ϭ 16), epilepsy and mental retardation (n ϭ 4), and controls (n ϭ 13), were 70.1 Ϯ 30.1, 34.2 Ϯ 26.2, and 105.8 Ϯ 64.3 ng/ml, respectively, and the levels of MHPG in subjects with RS (n ϭ 11) and controls (n ϭ 9) was 11.3 Ϯ 2.1 and 10.5 Ϯ 1.7 ng/ml. The mean CSF levels of HVA and MHPG in subjects with RS were not significantly different from those in controls.

Discussion

The mechanism of brain impairment in RS is still unknown. Zoghbi and colleagues 4 reported a significant reduction of CSF levels of HVA and MHPG in children with RS. On the other hand, Perry and associates 6 reported no difference of these levels between RS and controls. Therefore, the alterations of CSF biogenic amines in RS remains controversial. Recent research suggested that PEA is an important neuromodulator in psychiatric and behavioral disease. It has been considered to be difficult to measure the CSF levels of PEA, however, because of its low level in CSF and its rapid metabolism to phenylacetic acid (see Fig) . Recently, we established the methodology for measurement of PEA levels in CSF and found the CSF PEA level in Parkinson's disease was lower than for agematched controls, with a significant negative correlation between CSF level of PEA and Parkinson's disease severity (Hoehn and Yahr stage). 12 Those results have strongly suggested that the CSF levels of PEA reflect the dopaminergic neuron degeneration in Parkinson's disease. The most striking findings of our present studies are the marked reduction of PEA levels in CSF in girls with RS. This is the first demonstration of decreased CSF level of PEA in RS. Our study also revealed that CSF levels of HVA and MHPG, the metabolites of dopamine and norepinephrine, are not decreased in patients with RS.

Neuropathological study has shown that melanin content is markedly decreased in substantia nigra zona compacta, but no difference in the number of neurons in the substantia nigra was found in 9 girls with RS. These findings may support the dysmaturation of dopaminergic neuron in RS. 5 The significance of decreased CSF PEA levels found in our study may reflect the additional evidence of the impairment of nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons, because PEA was synthesized in these neurons. The most striking reduction in PEA levels in CSF occurred in the youngest girls with RS. It is during this period that disease onset is noted. This may also be the period of developmental arrest at the neurobiological level.

Recently, mutations in MECP2, that has a role in an epigenetic regulation of gene expression, was discovered in patients with RS. 2 The link between this discovery and the alteration of CSF PEA should be clarified, especially during the early phase of disease onset. Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by a progressive loss of dopaminergic neurons. This dopaminergic dysfunction can be demonstrated in vivo with positron emission tomography (PET) and single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT). The most widely used PET ligand in this respect is 6-[ 18 F]fluoro-L-dopa (FDOPA). The FDOPA uptake in the striatum is reduced in patients with PD, and it also correlates with the severity of the disease. 1 The progression of this nigrostriatal dopaminergic hypofunction in PD has been addressed in only a few studies. [2][3][4] Previous studies with FDOPA in PD have shown that the mean annual rate of decline of tracer uptake in the putamen is 8 to 9% of the baseline mean 2,3 and 3.5% of the baseline mean in the caudate nucleus. 3 Contrary to this, no significant decrement in FDOPA uptake was found in the caudate nucleus by Leenders and co-workers. 2 Using a different method of analysis, Vingerhoets and colleagues 4 found a 1.7% annual drop in striatal FDOPA uptake in PD. In their study, the putamen and caudate nucleus were not separated as different regions of interest (ROIs).

Progression in

Dopamine transporters are proteins that take part in the reuptake mechanism of dopamine within the presynaptic nerve terminals. There are several PET and SPECT tracers for dopamine transporters such as [ 11   ]␤-CIT-FP. The striatal uptake of these transporter ligands is reduced in PD, [5][6][7][8][9][10][11][12][13][14] and it correlates with the severity of the clinical symptoms of the patients. 11,[15][16][17] Although both FDOPA and dopamine transporter ligands are sensitive detectors of dopaminergic hypofunction in PD, they reflect different aspects of nigrostriatal function. 6-[ 18 F]fluoro-L-dopa uptake reflects its decarboxylation to and storage as 6-[ 18 F]fluoro-L-dopamine, whereas dopamine transporter ligand uptake primarily reflects binding to presynaptic dopamine reuptake sites. No studies have previously been performed on dopamine transporter ligand uptake during progression of PD. The purpose of this study was to evaluate dopamine transporter function with PET during the progression of PD using [ 18 F]CFT 18,19 dopamine reuptake ligand.

Subjects and Methods Subjects

We investigated 8 de novo patients with PD (2 women, 6 men). The mean age of the patients was 61.7 Ϯ 8.1 (mean Ϯ SD; range, 47-76) years. The average duration of symptoms was 2.1 Ϯ 2.0 years. The patients were not receiving antiparkinsonian medications at the time of the first PET scan. The antiparkinsonian medications were started thereafter, with a favorable response. The patients were treated with levodopa, dopamine agonists, selegiline, and anticholinergic medications in various combinations. The clinical symptoms of the patients were evaluated using the motor part of the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale. The clinical characteristics of the patients are shown in the Table . Seven healthy volunteers (3 women, 4 men) with a mean age of 59.4 Ϯ 6.4 (mean Ϯ SD; range, 50 -67) years were studied as controls. In addition, to study the reproducibility of [ 18 F]CFT measurements, 6 healthy volunteers (5 women, 1 man; age range, 45-70 years) were scanned twice at an approximate 1-month interval.

An [ 18 F]CFT PET scan was carried out twice at an interval of 2.0 Ϯ 0.1 years in PD patients and at an interval of 2.3 Ϯ 0.3 years in controls. In addition to the PET scan, all patients and controls underwent 1.5-T brain magnetic resonance imaging, which was interpreted by an experienced neuroradiologist. The magnetic resonance scan was used in the ROI analysis (see section on ROIs).  F]fluoride according to the method developed at our laboratory. 18,20 The radiochemical purity exceeded 98%, and the specific radioactivity at the time of injection was 11.3 Ϯ 3.8 GBq/mol.

Radiochemistry

PET Scanning

A whole-body PET scanner (ECAT 931/08-12; Siemens-CTI, Knoxville, TN) was used. This device gives 15 transaxial planes. The in-plane spatial resolution of the PET scanner is 6.5 mm (full width, half maximum), and the axial resolution is 6.8 mm. On average, 163 Ϯ 26 MBq of [ 18 F]CFT was injected intravenously. The injected dose was equal in the two PET scans. A 60-minute dynamic PET scan was performed 150 minutes after injection.

ROIs

The ROIs were drawn on the head of the caudate nucleus, putamen, and cerebellum on both hemispheres where the structures were best visualized. The heads of the caudate nucleus and putamen were located on two consecutive planes. The regions were identified and drawn on 1.5-T magnetic resonance images and then copied to the PET images. The magnetic resonance images were matched with the PET images using a surface fitting method and resliced according to PET images using trilinear interpolation. The average of the radioactivity concentrations of the putamen and caudate nucleus in these two planes was calculated. The cerebellum was used as reference region in the analysis because it has been shown to contain a negligible amount of dopamine and dopamine receptors. The uptake of [ 18 F]CFT was calculated as the region-cerebellum:cerebellum ratio at 180 to 210 minutes. The means of the corresponding left and right hemisphere ROI values were averaged before statistical analyses were performed.

The study was approved by the Joint Ethical Committee of Turku University and Turku University Central Hospital. Written informed consent was signed by each subject.

Statistics

The difference in [ 18 F]CFT uptake in patients and controls was evaluated by Student's unpaired t test, and the difference in [ 18 F]CFT uptake between the two scans was evaluated by paired t test separately for patients and controls. The reproducibility of [ 18 F]CFT measurements was evaluated by calculating the intraclass correlation coefficient. A high correlation indicates that the variation within subjects is small compared with the variation between subjects.

Results

At the first PET scan, the mean [ 18 F]CFT uptake in PD patients in the putamen was 1.45 Ϯ 0.45 (mean Ϯ SD), which was 42% of the control mean (3.42 Ϯ 0.56, p Ͻ 0.0001). In the caudate nucleus, the mean [ 18 F]CFT uptake was 2.43 Ϯ 0.59, which was 76% of the control mean (3.19 Ϯ 0.52, p Ͻ 0.05). The ratios declined by the time of the second PET scan, and the rate of annual decline was 13.1 Ϯ 5.2% ( p Ͻ 0.05) of the baseline mean in the putamen and 12.5 Ϯ 6.9%  . There was no significant difference in the decline of [ 18 F]CFT uptake between the contralateral and ipsilateral sides of symptom predominance. Figure 2 demonstrates the decline of [ 18 F]CFT uptake in a patient with PD during the 2-year scanning interval.

There was no significant correlation between the change in [ 18 F]CFT uptake and the change in Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale score between the two scans (r ϭ 0.18, p ϭ 0.67 for the putamen; r ϭ Ϫ0.13, p ϭ 0.76 for the caudate nucleus).

In controls, the annual decline for the putamen was 2.1 Ϯ 1.0% ( p Ͻ 0.05) and 2.9 Ϯ 1.3% for the caudate nucleus ( p Ͻ 0.05). The rate of decline was significantly faster in PD patients than in controls in both the putamen ( p Ͻ 0.05) and the caudate nucleus ( p Ͻ 0.05). In 6 healthy volunteers who were scanned twice at an interval of approximately 1 month, the variance between test and retest values was 0.0046 in the putamen and 0.0094 in the caudate nucleus, and the coefficients of variation were 5.6% for the putamen and 3.1% for the caudate nucleus. The intraclass correlation of [ 18 F]CFT uptake in both the putamen and the caudate nucleus was 0.97, indicating good reproducibility.

Discussion

Our results show that the [ 18 F]CFT uptake significantly declines in PD during a 2-year interval following the diagnosis, indicating the progressive loss of nigro-striatal dopaminergic terminals. A decline in [ 18 F]CFT uptake was also seen in controls during this period, but this decline was significantly less than in PD patients.

There are no previously published articles on dopamine transporter changes during the progression of PD. An 11.8% decline in striatal [ 123 I]␤-CIT uptake per year during progression in PD was reported in one abstract. 21 In previous studies, a decline in dopamine transporter ligand uptake has been found with increasing disability of PD. 11,[15][16][17] In those studies, different patients with various degrees of disease severity were studied. In the present study, the same individuals were studied both at the time of the diagnosis and 2 years later.

There are a few PET studies on the progression of PD using FDOPA as a ligand. [2][3][4] In these studies, the rate of annual decline in tracer uptake was approximately 8 to 9% in the putamen 2,3 and 3.5% in the caudate, 3 or 1.7% in the total striatum. 4 Thus, the percentage of decline obtained in the present study with [ 18 F]CFT is higher and of the same magnitude as that reported for the whole striatum using [ 123 I]␤-CIT SPECT. 21 The number of patients in our study is small; thus, the rate of decline in [ 18 F]CFT uptake should be considered as indicative. Nevertheless, even in this small patient population, a significant decline in dopamine transporter function is demonstrated during the progression of PD. To compare the sensitivity of FDOPA and [ 18 F]CFT, the same individuals should be scanned with both tracers. Moreover, to directly compare the rates of decline in FDOPA and [ 18 F]CFT uptake is not necessarily meaningful, because FDOPA and [ 18 F]CFT reflect different aspects of nigrostriatal function. In addition, the outcome measure is different (influx constant k i using tissue reference in FDOPA studies 2,3 vs the region-cerebellum:cerebellum ratio in our [ 18 F]CFT study). Indeed, Morrish and co-workers 3 reported that the rate of decline in FDOPA uptake varies depending on the outcome measure, with the variation being 0.4 to 4.7% of the normal mean per year according to both structure and analysis methods.

The uptake of [ 18 F]CFT is not a direct measure of nigral neurons but of presynaptic dopaminergic function. Nevertheless, postmortem studies have indicated that striatal [ 3 H]CFT binding correlates with levels of dopamine and dopamine transporter protein in PD. 22 When studying disease progression in PD with PET, it must be remembered that the change in tracer uptake may result from progression of the disease itself (ie, progressive loss of nigral neurons), may be caused by treatment, or may be the result of a combination of these two factors. In addition, compensatory changes may occur during the course of the disease. Ideally, to resolve these questions, one should study patients without any medication. It is, however, impossible to consider studying PD patients at a 2-year interval without any medication. The relative contributions of treatment and the disease itself on [ 18 F]CFT uptake are impossible to determine, but our preliminary ongoing and unpublished findings suggest that levodopa treatment alone does not have a significant effect on [ 18 F]CFT uptake. This does not rule out the possibility that other treatments for PD might affect [ 18 F]CFT uptake.

In conclusion, our results show a decline in [ 18 F]CFT uptake in both the putamen and caudate nucleus during a 2-year interval in patients with PD. Thus, dopamine transporter ligands seem to be sensitive markers for the rate of progression in PD and feasible, for example, in studies of neuroprotection.

The assistance of the staff of the Turku PET Centre and the financial support of the Pa ¨ivikki and Sakari Sohlberg Foundation and the Finnish Parkinson Foundation are gratefully acknowledged. A few studies have reported a variety of nonspecific histological lesions in patients with IgA monoclonal gammopathies and polyneuropathy. In our case, using electron microscopy, we observed widenings of the myelin lamellae identical to those commonly described in IgM neuropathies with anti-myelin-associated glycoprotein activity. Using immunoelectron microscopy, we demonstrated a direct involvement of IgA in myelin lesions. The search for a direct link between monoclonal dysglobulinemia, regardless of type, and polyneuropathy is important and may influence treatment.

References

Vallat J-M, Tabaraud F, Sindou P, Preux P-M, Vandenberghe A, Steck A.

Myelin widenings and MGUS-IgA: an immunoelectron microscopic study.

Ann Neurol 2000;47:808 -811

In our own series of patients, we have discussed the link between peripheral neuropathy and monoclonal dysglobulinemias. 1 The case reported here is characterized by unusual myelin lesions directly linked to IgA (MGUS). On electron microscopy, the features were identical to those commonly described in IgM neuropathies with anti-myelin-associated glycoprotein (anti-MAG) activity; these widenings of the myelin lamellae are not entirely specific 2 as borne out by the present case.

Patient and Method

A 72-year-old man was admitted with a 1-year history of progressive paresthesias and decrease of sensation in his hands and feet, with a slight gait unsteadiness. His past medical history was uneventful. There was no family history of neuromuscular disease. On examination, the sensory responses to light touch and pinprick were decreased in the patient's hands and legs. Vibration perception was decreased in the knees and ankles. The patellar and Achilles' reflexes were bilaterally absent. There was no weakness or muscle atrophy. There was a slight unsteadiness of gait but no tremor, and heel to knee to toe was normal. The general examination was otherwise normal. Routine laboratory tests were normal. Assay of immunoglobulins showed an increase in IgA: 12.4 g/L (normal, 0.88 -4.10) with no other anomalies. Serum electrophoresis and immunofixation evidenced a monoclonal peak of IgA type. No anti-glycolipid, anti-MAG, anti-P 0 , anti-PMP22, or anti-myelin basic protein (anti-MBP) antibodies were detected. The serum was also tested on normal human peripheral nerve by indirect immunofluorescence as previously described. 3 Marked IgA-antimyelin activity was observed. IgA content in cerebrospinal fluid was abnormal (54.2 mg/L; normal, Ͻ 3.4), accompanied by a slightly elevated protein content (0.82 g/L) and two cells per cubic millimeter. The bone marrow was normal on sternal puncture.

Electrophysiological examination (Table ) favored a sensorimotor neuropathy of demyelinating type affecting all four limbs. There was marked uniform slowing of motor conduction velocities with marked temporal dispersion in muscle action potentials, accompanied by prolonged distal motor latencies with a nonsignificant index of terminal latency and a lengthening or absence of F response. No sensory potentials were recorded in any of the four limbs. Electromyography did not detect signs of denervation in the anterior tibial or first dorsal interosseous muscles of the hand; effort tracings were neurogenic with increased and polyphasic amplitudes of motor units. Brain nuclear magnetic resonance scanning did not demonstrate any involvement of white matter.

In view of the patient's slight handicap and slow course of the condition, he has not so far expressed any desire for specific treatment.

Duplication or deletion of chromosome 17p11.2-p12 was ruled out. No mutations were found in the exons of P 0 and PMP22.

A biopsy specimen from the superficial radial nerve was divided in four portions. Paraffin sections of the first portion were examined using standard methods. Transverse cryostat sections of the second portion were examined by direct immunofluorescence microscopy using rabbit antiserums monospecific to human IgA, IgG, IgM, and light chains, and C3d. The third fragment was fixed in buffered glutaraldehyde, embedded in epon, and prepared for light and electron microscopic examination. The last portion was processed for ultracryomicrotomy as described previously 4 ; tissues were immunostained using rabbit antiserums monospecific to human IgA, IgG, IgM, and light chains, and anti-MAG. These antibodies were revealed by adding IgG-coated colloidal particles (12 nm in diameter at 1:25 dilution), followed by methylcellulose-uranylacetate staining.

Results

There was a modest reduction in the number of myelinated fibers (5,373/mm 2 vs 6,675/mm 2 in the controls). No abnormal cells were seen in the endoneurium, epineurium, or perineurium. Direct immunofluorescence with anti-IgA, anti-, and anti-C3d antibodies demonstrated annular binding to many myelinated fibers (Ͼ70%). On electron microscopic examination, regular widenings of most of the myelin lamellae were apparent in both small-and large-diameter myelinated fibers. On fibers isolated by "teasing," the widenings were clearly segmental. On cross sections, widenings could be seen between any lamellae of the myelin sheath (Fig, A). On longitudinal sections, the lesions extended as far as the nodes of Ranvier. Numerous signs of segmental demyelination were observed, with frequent myelin-free internodal zones. On high magni-fication, the widenings that seemed to be empty probably corresponded to a dissociation of the intraperiodic line (see Fig, B). The average separation between two layers of uncompacted myelin was 31.9 Ϯ 4.2 nm compared with 14.4 Ϯ 1.9 nm for normally compacted myelin. No particular abnormalities were noted on examination of endoneurial capillaries.

Immunopathological investigations at the ultrastructural level confirmed the results of direct immunofluorescence. Only IgA and light chains were detected specifically (see Fig, C). There was no colocalization with MAG on comparison with positive controls: nerve biopsies from 2 patients with neuropathy associated with IgM monoclonal dysglobulinemia, which were anti-MAG-positive with widenings of the myelin lamellae on routine electron microscopic examination.

Discussion

To our knowledge, widenings of the myelin lamellae in a patient with peripheral neuropathy and IgA have yet to be described. In our case, direct immunofluorescence and immunoelectron microscopy demonstrated that the myelin lesions were a result of infiltration of IgA. The absence of inflammatory cells in the epineurium, endoneurium, and perineurium and the lack of any signs of vasculitis were noteworthy. We were thus convinced that the myelin lesions were a direct result of the IgA and did not stem from inflammatory processes. 2 No anti-MAG or anti-glycolipid antibodies were detected, which was supported by the immunoelectron microscopic study. No colocalization of IgA and MAG could be discerned in the widenings of the myelin lamellae in comparison with that seen in positive controls represented by biopsies taken from 2 pa- tients with peripheral neuropathy and monoclonal IgM associated with anti-MAG activity. In both cases, IgM and MAG were observed in the widenings of the myelin lamellae (unpublished observations). The present case seems to be the first in which the myelin lesions could be unambiguously attributed to the monoclonal IgA, although the exact antigen was not determined. In comparison with cases of peripheral neuropathy associated with IgM and anti-MAG activity, it was noteworthy that nearly all myelinated fibers were abnormal and that the widenings involved most of the myelin lamellae. In cases of IgM (MGUS) with anti-MAG activity, the widenings tend to only involve a few peripheral lamellae.

Other authors have reported a variety of histological lesions that are neither characteristic nor specific for patients with IgA monoclonal gammopathies and peripheral neuropathies. [5][6][7] It is now recognized that activation of the lytic pathway of complement on myelin sheaths enlarges the myelin lamellae. 2,8 On direct immunofluorescence, the presence of C3d in most of the myelinated fibers in the nerve biopsy of our patient is consistent with this mechanism. By analogy to the manner in which anti-MAG autoantibodies induce a progressive demyelinating polyneuropathy, the monoclonal IgA in our patient (in whom the antigenic target in myelin has yet to be identified) may well have modified axon-Schwann cell interactions. 9 The activation of complement that is consistently observed in these autoimmune processes may help to account for the nonspecificity of the widenings of the myelin lamellae seen in patients with other dysimmune neuropathies and those associated with monoclonal IgM and anti-MAG activity. Examples include cases of myeloma, 10 IgG gammopathy, 11 Guillain-Barre ´syndrome, 2 and inflammatory demyelinating neuropathies. 12 In this patient, who suffered from pure sensory neuropathy with no tremor and no detectable anti-MAG activity in serum, the electrophysiological abnormalities did not resemble those typically observed in neuropathies with anti-MAG antibodies. The indices of terminal latencies were not reduced significantly. 13 Furthermore, the temporal dispersion of motor responses favored peripheral neuropathy of the chronic inflammatory demyelinating type.

The immunoelectron microscopically confirmed demonstration of the direct involvement of IgA in myelin lesions shows the value of nerve biopsies in such cases.

This study was supported by a grant from Association Franc ¸aise contre les Myopathies.

We thank Laurence Richard, Martine Diot, Beat Erne, and Marc Sollberger for technical assistance, and Nathalie Couade and Christine Legrand for typing the manuscript. Since Tome ´and co-workers 1 identified laminin ␣2 chain deficiency as the primary cause of severe congenital muscular dystrophy, several cases with partial deficiency of the protein and variable clinical phenotypes have been described. [2][3][4][5][6][7][8][9][10] In all these cases, muscle histopathology was characterized by increased perimysial and endomysial connective tissue and myopathic changes. We report on a patient with partial laminin ␣2 chain deficiency caused by two novel LAMA2 mutations (the patient is a compound heterozygote), with mild myopathy, leukoencephalopathy, and histological features of muscle suggesting inclusion body myositis (IBM).

Patient and Methods

Case Report

A 29-year-old man came to our attention for transient neurological symptoms after receiving an electrical shock a year previously. His family history was unremarkable. He had slightly delayed motor milestones, walking at 18 months, but his subsequent development was normal.

A neurological examination disclosed pes cavus, mild wasting of proximal leg muscles, calf hypertrophy, and mild weakness of all leg muscles; knee reflexes were decreased, and ankle reflexes were rather brisk, but clonus and other pyramidal signs were not observed.

Serum creatine kinase levels were consistently elevated (902, 471, and 1,236 U/L [normal Ͻ195 U/L]). A cerebro-spinal fluid examination revealed a slightly high protein level (68 mg/dl). The patient's IQ was 85 (Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale), and his electroencephalogram was normal. Spinal cord magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was also normal. Brain MRI revealed a diffuse and symmetrical increase in the signal intensity of the supratentorial white matter on T2-weighted images, mostly involving subcortical U-fibers, with some broadening of the gyri in the parasagittal regions. An electromyogram showed mild myopathic abnormalities in proximal upper limb muscles (deltoid and biceps) and the tibialis anterior together with mild prolongation of F-wave latencies (32.4 -33.7 msec in upper limbs, 54.6 -59.4 msec in lower limbs). There was no abnormal spontaneous muscle activity. Motor conduction velocities were in the lower nor-

Fig 1. Histological study (a and b), vacuole content characterization (c [thioflavin-S], d [ubiquitin], e [␤-amyloid protein], and f [tau protein]), and ultrastructural study of patient's muscle (g and h). Autophagic vacuoles (a), mononuclear cell infiltrate (b), positive vacuolar staining in (c-f ), and intranuclear tubulofilaments (g and h) are shown. (Original magnification: a and b, ϫ250;

c-f, ϫ400; g, ϫ10,000; h, ϫ31,000.) mal range, and sensory nerve conduction was normal. Visual evoked potentials and brainstem auditory evoked potentials were normal, although sensory evoked potential studies revealed a complete lack of cortical responses on lower limb stimulation and slightly increased latencies of the peripheral N9 and N13 components on upper limb stimulation.

A needle biopsy of the right quadriceps and an open biopsy of the left biceps showed similar features: increased proliferation of perimysial and endomysial connective tissue, fiber size variability with hypertrophic and hypotrophic fibers, muscle fiber splitting, central nuclei, and the presence of rimmed vacuoles in 3.49% of atrophic and normal-sized fibers (Fig 1a). A single small mononuclear cell infiltrate (see Fig 1b) consisting of macrophages and CD4 ϩ and CD8 ϩ lymphocytes was also observed, in which a few mononuclear cells were surrounding and invading nonnecrotic fibers. Brain MRI and clinical examination of the patient's 3 siblings were normal.

Immunohistochemistry

Muscle biopsies from the patient were frozen in isopentane cooled in liquid nitrogen and stored in liquid nitrogen until use. Immunohistochemical analysis of dystrophin; ␤-dystroglycan; ␣-, ␤-, ␥and ␦-sarcoglycans; and laminin ␣2 chain was performed on 6-mm cryosections as described elsewhere. 10 Vacuole contents were determined on consecutive cryosec-tions by Congo red (not shown) and thioflavin-S staining as well as immunostaining for ␤-amyloid protein, tau protein, and ubiquitin. The ␤-amyloid protein was detected with a polyclonal antibody raised in rabbits against a synthetic peptide containing amino acids 1 through 40 of the protein (dilution at 1:500); this antibody was the kind gift of Dr Tagliavini from the Neuropathology Department of the Istituto Nazionale Neurologico C. Besta. Tau protein was detected with a commercial polyclonal antibody (Dako) diluted at 1:100; ubiquitin was detected with a commercial monoclonal antibody (Dako) diluted at 1:100. Vacuole contents were determined simultaneously on cryosections from 2 patients previously diagnosed to have IBM on clinical and morphological grounds.

Electron Microscopy

A small fragment of muscle tissue was fixed in 4% glutaraldehyde in phosphate buffer, postfixed in osmium tetroxide, dehydrated, and embedded in Spurr resin for conventional electron microscopy.

Immunoblot Analysis

Laminin ␣2 chain expression by immunoblot analysis was evaluated as previously described 10 using a commercial monoclonal antibody (Chemicon) recognizing the 80-kd  fragment and an affinity-purified polyclonal antibody against the 300-kd fragment, which was kindly donated by Dr K.P. Campbell. 11 

Molecular Analysis

Genomic DNA extracted from blood was analyzed by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using oligonucleotide primers and conditions as described elsewhere. 12 For single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis, PCR products were denatured and separated on 10% polyacrylamide (37.5: 1.0 ratio) minigels as described elsewhere. 12 Both strands of aberrant conformers were sequenced using the same primers as for the PCR amplification on an Applied Biosystems automated sequencer.

Results

Partial laminin ␣2 chain deficiency was detected with both antibodies. Positivity on muscle fiber surfaces was patchy, and intensity varied from fiber to fiber (Fig 2a-d). Immunoblot analysis (see Fig 2e and f ) with the polyclonal antibody recognizing the 300-kd fragment showed a band of greatly reduced intensity at about 300 kd and no band with the antibody recognizing the 80-kd fragment. DNA analysis by SSCP showed abnormal conformers in exons 29 and 31 in the patient, exon 29 in the patient's mother, and exon 31 in the father and a sister of the patient. DNA analysis of the 2 brothers was normal. Sequencing of the abnormal conformers revealed two new mutations in the patient: a missense mutation due to a T3 C transition at position 4405 in exon 29 (Cys1469Arg) and a nonsense mutation due to a C3 T transition at position 4645 in exon 31 (Arg1549Stop) (Fig 3). A search for abnormal SSCP conformer corresponding to the Cys1469Arg missense mutation in over 100 normal unrelated subjects (controls) was negative.

Vacuoles were all positive to Congo red and thioflavin-S staining (see Fig 1c) as were the vacuoles from the two classic IBM muscle biopsies. Thioflavin-S staining is used in many studies related to Alzheimer's disease 13 but only rarely in IBM. In our hands, this method is equivalent to Congo red staining for de- The ultrastructural study disclosed fibers with degenerative autophagic features consisting of membranous bodies with concentric lamellae, swollen components of sarcoplasmic reticulum, and organelle debris. Around these autophagic areas, large agglomerates of filamentous material were observed, which were very likely disorganized myofilaments. Within the autophagic areas were larger filamentous inclusions similar to those described in IBM. Similar filamentous inclusions, which were tubular in cross section (16 -18 nm in diameter) were also observed in two nuclei (see Fig 1g  and h).

Discussion

This is the first patient to be described with a mild myopathy caused by LAMA2 gene mutations, resulting in partial laminin ␣2 chain deficiency, and histological features in muscle similar to those of classic IBM. The patient also had a central white matter abnormality on MRI like that usually observed in congenital muscular dystrophy with partial or total laminin ␣2 chain deficiency. 10,14,15 SSCP analysis of all LAMA2 exons identified a nonsense mutation in exon 31 and a missense mutation in exon 29. The missense mutation affects a cysteine residue, which is probably involved in intramolecular disulfide bonding, in one of the highly conserved cysteine-rich repeats of the short arm of the laminin ␣2 chain. Loss of this residue probably alters the tertiary structure of the protein. We have recently identified 2 patients with congenital muscular dystrophy and partial laminin ␣2 chain deficiency as well as cysteine changes in domain IIIb of the protein, 1 of whom had more severe clinical features than the present patient. 2 Although we did not sequence the entire gene, the finding that this mutation is not a polymorphism strongly suggests that it is pathological. The mutation should permit synthesis of the ␣2 chain and formation of the heterotrimeric laminin molecule but is likely to result in protein instability or increased sensitivity to proteolysis. Such instability may partly explain the results of our immunoblot analysis: preparation involves protein extraction from homogenized muscle, providing increased opportunity for degradation. The lack of the expected protein band with the 80-kd antibody could be due to poor reactivity of this antibody in immunoblotting, because control bands were never very intense in our hands.

Several cases of congenital muscular dystrophy with partial laminin ␣2 deficiency have been reported. [2][3][4][5][6][7][8][9][10] Some of these are characterized by a long-standing and slowly progressive myopathy, which is often associated with severe tendon retractions; some of these patients present with the typical severe phenotype of congenital muscular dystrophy, with early onset and inability to achieve independent walking. In all these patients, dystrophic features of variable severity are observed in muscle biopsies, consisting of degenerating fibers and increased connective tissue. Inflammatory infiltrates are not uncommon in congenital muscular dystrophies lacking laminin ␣2 chain. In a review of 10 patients completely deficient in laminin ␣2, a striking inflammatory infiltrate was observed in 1 patient with lossof-function deletion mutations in the LAMA2 gene, and minor inflammatory signs were observed in 2 others. 16 Rimmed vacuoles similar to those observed in IBM have not been reported previously.

Inflammation, vacuoles, amyloid deposits, and 15to 18-nm tubulofilaments on muscle biopsy are diagnostic criteria for IBM, 17 and all were present in our patient. He did not exhibit all the clinical features of the disease, however; in particular, the age of onset was less than 30 years, and there was no weakness of the finger and wrist flexors.

A family with IBM and leukoencephalopathy was described in 1988 when laminin ␣2 chain immunostaining was not available. 18 In this family, 5 of 6 siblings were affected and their clinical condition, muscle findings, and brain abnormalities were very similar to those of our patient. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) invades the brain early after infection. 1 Central nervous system (CNS) infection may be asymptomatic but is complicated by acquired immunodeficiency syndrome dementia complex in some 25% of patients. From neuropathological [2][3][4] and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 5,6 studies, it is known that the viral load is an important factor in HIVinduced CNS pathology. The dynamics of viral replication in the brain are largely unknown, however. This question is also of interest for the treatment of HIV infection in general, as long-term suppression of replication and eradication of HIV from the body may be hampered by the persistence of virus in anatomical and cellular reservoirs such as the CNS. 7 We 8 and others 9 have recently described the fact that during highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), the virus found in lumbar CSF undergoes rapid elimination in most patients. These results were estimations based on measurements in a few blood and CSF samples taken before and at long intervals during HAART. Furthermore, all hitherto described data on viral kinetics in the CNS were based on CSF obtained by puncture of the lumbar sac. Because the CSF is produced in the brain, and as its composition is subject to major changes during its bulk flow down the spinal canal, analysis of CSF from the ventricles allows a closer view of the pathological processes in the brain than does lumbar CSF.

To understand the pathogenesis of human immunodeficiency virus-induced neuropathology, it is critical to know the dynamics of viral replication in the central nervous system. Viral decay kinetics were mathematically analyzed from multiple serial specimens of ventricular cerebrospinal fluid and plasma during antiretroviral therapy in a patient with asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus infection and an external ventricular catheter for hydrocephalus. A rapid exponential decay of virus with an elimination half-life of 4.2 days in ventricular cerebrospinal fluid and 2.3 days in plasma was found. Sequencing the V3 loop-encoding envelope gene of virus in both compartments revealed high sequence homology. The combined data suggest that virus in ventricular cerebrospinal fluid is at least partly contributed by rapidly replicating virus-producing cells recruited from the circulation.

We report on the short-term kinetics of CSF and plasma viral load in a patient undergoing HAART and in whom ventricular CSF was frequently sampled through a ventricular catheter.

Patient and Methods Patient

The patient was a 32-year-old homosexual man who presented with an afebrile severe right pontine syndrome 2 weeks after surgical treatment of a paronychia. Imaging studies suggested a brainstem abscess, and this was confirmed by stereotactic biopsy, draining pus from which Staphylococcus aureus was cultured. Before biopsy, the patient developed obstructive hydrocephalus that required drainage by an external ventricular catheter. A hitherto unrecognized asymptomatic HIV infection was diagnosed. The CD4 lymphocyte count was 234 per microliter, and the plasma viral load was 8,100 copies/ml. After drainage of the abscess and with antibiotic treatment, the patient made a remarkable recovery.

One week after implantation of the ventricular catheter, HAART was begun, using 200 mg of zidovudin administered intravenously three times daily, 150 mg of lamivudin administered twice daily, and 600 mg of ritonavir administered twice daily (day 0 of the HAART). On day 5, 400 mg of saquinavir administered twice daily (soft gelatin capsules) was added, and the ritonavir was reduced to 400 mg administered twice daily.

Ventricular CSF and plasma were sampled every 12 hours for the first 3 days, every 24 hours for another 6 days, and then again at day 14. Lumbar CSF and plasma were sampled at days Ϫ12 and 27. The material was immediately stored at Ϫ80°C and collectively analyzed for HIV RNA concentration by an ultrasensitive quantitative polymerase chain reaction (Roche Amplicor HIV-1 Monitor, Mannheim, Germany).

Ventricular CSF predating the initiation of HAART (days Ϫ7 and 0) and taken during the sampling period was clear, with a median white cell count of 8 per microliter, a median total protein of 0.13 g/L, and a median albumin ratio of 2.05. These values did not show any systematic changes dur-ing the sampling period. Thus, there was no evidence of relevant meningeal irritation or disturbance of the blood-brain barrier.

Method

For the calculation of the elimination kinetics of virus in the two anatomical compartments, we used the assumptions and mathematical methods published previously. 10,11 The mean of two pretreatment values was set to be the initial viral load V (0) . Our data indicated an exponential decline of viral load during treatment (dV/dt ϭ ϪcV). We found c, and thereby the half-life, t 1/2 , to equal ln(2)/c, using a numerical least squares method. The logarithm of our model was fitted to the logarithm of our experimental data.

For sequence analysis, a 400-base pair fragment of the env region spanning the V3 loop, including the principal neutralization determinant, was amplified directly from the patient's plasma and ventricular and lumbar CSF. The nucleotide sequences of both DNA strands were determined using dye termination technology (Applied Biosystems, Weiterstadt, Germany) on an automated sequencer (AbiPrism 310, Applied Biosystems).

Fig 1. Measured values of human immunodeficiency virus concentration in plasma (ⅷ), ventricular cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) ( e), and lumbar CSF (᭛). The lines represent the theoretical exponential decline of viral load. For plasma virus, we assumed a first (rapid) phase of decay for days 0 to 9 and a second (slower) phase thereafter. The first phase of the model was obtained by a numerical least squares fit applied to the log values of the model and the measured data. The second phase of the plasma model is a rough estimate based on the measured values at days 14 and 27. The interrupted transition between the two phases indicates their different nature. The model for ventricular CSF was also obtained by least squares fit of the data for days 0 to 14. The model for lumbar CSF was again obtained by connecting the two available viral load values.

Brief Communication: Eggers et al: Clearance of HIV from CSF 817

Results

The elimination half-life of plasma virus was determined to be 2.3 days using the values obtained from day 0 to day 9 of HAART (Fig 1). Unlike Perelson and co-workers, 12 we did not attempt to determine a slower second phase of decay, because there were too few viral load values after day 9 of HAART.

Ventricular CSF was available from the first 14 days of HAART, during which time an exponential decay of virus with an elimination half-life of 4.2 days was observed.

In lumbar CSF, the viral load decreased from 1,500 copies/ml before HAART (day Ϫ12) to 90 copies/ml during HAART (day 27). As this was a measurement of two time points with a long interval, and as exponential decay may be expected in lumbar CSF as well, we did not attempt to calculate the elimination half-life of virus in lumbar CSF.

To test for possible segregation into different viral quasispecies in the CSF and blood in our patient, the V3 loop-encoding env gene from virus in the two anatomical compartments was sequenced. Alignment of the sequences revealed a homology of 99% for the comparison between plasma virus and lumbar CSF, 100% between plasma virus and ventricular CSF, and 99.5% between lumbar and ventricular CSF. A phylogenetic analysis with seven closely related published subtypes (A, B, and D subtypes) showed clustering of the patient's isolates (Fig 2).

Discussion

In systemic HIV infection, the interruption of the viral life cycle by HAART leads to a decay of plasma virus that is characterized by a rapid first phase followed by a slower second phase. 12 The decay rate of the first phase is largely determined by the elimination of free virus and high-level virus-producing cells such as lymphocytes, and the decay rate of the second phase is primarily believed to reflect the elimination of longlived populations of virus-producing cells.

In the patient described here, who had asymptomatic HIV infection, the time constants for virus decay in plasma were in the range expected from previous observations. 10,11 Interestingly, virus in ventricular CSF also decayed exponentially with kinetics similar to but somewhat slower than those detected in plasma. The magnitude of viral load reduction in lumbar CSF was in line with that in ventricular CSF, supporting the finding of rapid elimination of CSF virus. To our knowledge, this is the first study in which the calculation of exponential and rapid elimination kinetics is warranted by the availability of a sufficient number of viral load values.

The finding gains further significance because of the evaluation of ventricular rather than lumbar CSF, as the brain parenchyma surrounding the ventricles contributes to CSF production and displays a relatively high virus load. 13 The decay kinetics of plasma virus are seen as a function of the decay kinetics of productively infected cells. 10,11 Extending this interpretation to the CSF compartment, rapid decay kinetics of those cells contributing most of the CSF virus in our patient must be assumed. Price and Staprans 14 speculated about two types of CSF infection with HIV. In "transitory" infection, CSF virus would be constantly renewed by virus-infected cells originating from the blood, while 

. Phylogenetic tree of virus derived from the patient (blood and ventricular and lumbar cerebrospinal fluid) in relation to seven closely related published human immunodeficiency virus subtypes. The dendrogram was constructed by aligning the V3 loop sequences of our patient with

published sequences using the PHYLIP package. 15 According to their high degree of sequence homology (see text), the patient's isolates cluster together.

the "autonomous" type of infection would be independent of blood-borne virus-producing cells. In transitory infection, it should be expected that plasma and CSF virus would show a high degree of genetic similarity rather than segregation in different viral quasispecies. We suggest that the finding of rapid decay of CSF virus during HAART and the high degree of sequence homology of CSF and plasma virus in our patient are compatible with the idea of relatively short-lived blood cells trafficking into the CNS and renewing the population of CSF virus. How the human brain controls the subtle coupling between eye and head movements is still debated. The brain could either coordinate two separate (eye and head) networks or use a single system involved in gaze (eye ؉ head) control. In a recent report, a total transfer from eye to head movements was observed in a patient with congenital ophthalmoplegia. This led the authors to hypothesize that such transfer resulted from a long-term adaptation between oculomotor and head movement systems. We report on a patient in whom a similar transfer was observed but at the acute stage of an acquired ophthalmoplegia. This case demonstrates that the transfer between head and eye movements does not necessarily require long-term adaptation and supports the hypothesis of a common unique gaze motor command in which eye and head movements would be rapidly exchangeable. The control of gaze orientation (ie, eye-head coordination) has greatly evolved throughout different stages of phylogenesis. Eye and head movements are frequently tightly coupled in primitive animals, whereas they may be totally uncoupled in higher mammals (eg, humans). This evolution suggests that the neural machinery subtending the organization of eye-head coordination has progressively acquired an increased flexibility in more evolved species. 1 A recent report described a subject with a congenital ophthalmoplegia in whom reading could be achieved by head movements presenting all the characteristics of eye movements during reading in unimpaired subjects. 2 The observation of a total transfer from eye to From *INSERM U289 and †Service d'Explorations Fonctionnelles du Syste `me Nerveux, Ho ˆpital de la Salpe ˆtrie `re, and ‡Laboratoire de Physiologie de la Perception et de l'Action, Colle `ge de France, Paris, France.

head movements led the authors to suggest that it resulted from "an adaptation of neural function in the superior colliculus." Since then, we have found a patient with a complete acute horizontal ophthalmoplegia who showed a similar eye-to-head transfer, especially during reading. The striking fact of this observation was that this phenomenon was present at the very first stage of the disease. The immediate occurrence of this eye-head transfer goes against a progressive adaptive mechanism and therefore requires an alternative hypothesis.

Patient and Methods Patient

A 34-year-old woman without any previous neurological history was hospitalized after rapid onset of an isolated complete horizontal ophthalmoplegia. On admission, horizontal saccades and horizontal smooth pursuit were completely abolished bilaterally, and no slow eye movement could be elicited by horizontal passive rotations of the head. Vergence and vertical eye movements were normal. The patient spontaneously reported that while the complete ophthalmoplegia was rapidly developing, she could still continue to read by briefly moving her head and keeping the paper immobile. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a pontine lesion involving both abducens nuclei, which was probably due to multiple sclerosis (Fig 1), and prednisolone (1 g/day) was prescribed. The ophthalmoplegia remained unchanged during the first 10 days of hospitalization. When the patient was seen for a follow-up examination 7 weeks later, the ocular motor deficit had totally disappeared.

Experimental Conditions

Eye and head movements were recorded twice: an initial recording session was performed at the acute stage (3 days after admission), and a second session was performed 7 weeks later (ie, after complete recovery). During both sessions, the subject performed a visually guided task and a reading task.

Visually guided eye and head movements were tested by asking the subject to follow as accurately as possible a visual target displayed on a ramp located 100 cm in front of her. The visual target appeared initially at a central position and was then moved to a right or left 20°position. In some blocks of trials, central target offset and peripheral target onset occurred simultaneously ("no gap" condition). In other blocks, the central target was extinguished 200 msec before lateral target presentation ("gap" condition). At least 12 head saccades (at the acute stage and after recovery) and 12 eye saccades (after recovery) were recorded in each direction and in each condition. During the first recording session, the subject performed the task in a head-free condition. During the second recording session, the head was immobilized at the temples.

In the reading task, the subject was asked to read aloud a text presented on A4 portrait format paper, subtending a visual angle of 15°. This task was repeated three times. During the two sessions, the subject performed the task in a head-free condition, and both eyes and head movements were recorded.

Eye and Head Movement Recording Techniques

Horizontal head movements were measured by a rotatory potentiometer mounted on a light soft helmet worn by the subject. The helmet was connected to a chair-fixed metallic frame above the patient's head by a mechanical device composed of carbon fiber rods linked by a hinge joint. This system, by virtue of universal joints, did not hamper horizontal angular head movements and had a resolution of 0.5°. Movements of both eyes were recorded simultaneously with an infrared light eye tracker mounted on spectacles (IRIS; Skalar Medical, Delft, The Netherlands). This system has a spatial resolution of 0.1°. Data were sampled at a frequency of 500 Hz and stored for off-line analysis.

Results

Visually Guided Movements

Results from head and eye movement recordings are summarized in the Table . At the acute stage, no significant horizontal eye movements could be detected: the subject followed the visual target exclusively by means of head movements. The latency of visually guided head movements was 408 msec rightward (SD ϭ 46) and 404 msec leftward (SD ϭ 38) in the "no gap" condition, and it was 310 msec rightward (SD ϭ 39) and 321 msec leftward (SD ϭ 43) in the "gap" condition. For each direction, head latency was significantly longer in the "no gap" than in the "gap" condition (Student's t test: p Ͻ 0.001 for both rightward and leftward movements). The average 20°head movement velocity was 56°/sec (SD ϭ 15.2, no significant right-to-left asymmetry). At the recovery stage, the latency of visually guided saccades was 302 msec rightward (SD ϭ 38) and 272 msec leftward (SD ϭ 29) in the "no gap" condition, and it was 222 msec rightward (SD ϭ 28) and 212 msec leftward (SD ϭ 17) in the "gap" condition. Saccade latency was significantly increased in the "no gap" condition compared with the "gap" condition in both directions (Student's t test: p Ͻ 0.001 for both rightward and leftward saccades). A ⌬ reaction time or "gap effect" was defined as the difference between the "no gap" and "gap" conditions. The resulting gap effect was 98 msec rightward and 81 msec leftward for head movements, and it was 80 msec rightward and 60 msec leftward for eye movements. The average velocity of 20°saccades was 266°/sec (SD ϭ 18.4, no right-to-left asymmetry).

Eye and Head Movements during Reading

At the acute stage, recording of gaze movements during reading confirmed the absence of significant eye movements and revealed that the head moved with a typical "reading pattern" 3 : brief fixation periods were interrupted by small rightward progression saccades and large leftward return sweeps (Fig 2). Reading speed was slow (143 words/min, SD ϭ 12) compared with that of normal subjects (4 subjects reading the same text: 186 words/min, SD ϭ 9; p Ͻ 0.001), but the duration of fixation periods (185 msec, SD ϭ 40) and the number of letters per saccade (mean, 6.3) were normal. 3 The second recording session confirmed the complete recovery of eye movements and revealed a total reversal in the pattern of eye and head movements (see Fig 2). At this time, reading speed had increased to a normal value (179 words/min, SD ϭ 9).

Discussion

The pattern of ocular motor abnormality presented by this patient at the acute stage is consistent with a lesion of both abducens nuclei. Although such cases have previously been reported on occasion, the most interesting finding in this patient was that she could totally replace eye saccades by head saccades, thus allowing normal reading. Because head movements during reading were recorded 3 days after the onset of ophthalmoplegia, it is not possible to determine whether this behavior resulted from an immediate eye-to-head transfer or from a short-term adaptation. Nevertheless, such rapid transfer clearly rules out a long-term adaptive process. Slightly reduced reading speed was ascribed to the relative slowness of head saccades compared with eye saccades, 4 because, in her case, other parameters such as the number of letters per saccade and the duration of fixation periods were normal.

The appearance in head movements of a reading pattern and a gap effect (previously known to be specific to the oculomotor system 5 ) is reminiscent of the immediate head-to-eye transfer observed in head-free monkeys pursuing a target: if head movement is suddenly braked, the smooth pursuit command drives the eyes after only 15 msec. 6 This immediate transfer suggests the existence of an anatomical-functional overlap between eye and head motor systems. Indeed, a large cerebral network driven by a gaze (ie, eye ϩ head) motor command and connected with both eye and head premotor structures has been described at various levels of the central nervous system. In the brainstem, the activity of reticular premotor neurons, namely, "oculomotor bursters" ("eye only" excitatory burst neurons), "eye-neck," and "neck only" reticulospinal neurons, activated by descending tectoreticulospinal neurons during orienting movements may be combined so as to trigger a large repertoire of coordinated or uncoupled eye and head movements. 1 This brainstem circuitry is mainly under the control of the superior colliculus, which generates a gaze motor signal in primates. 7 A gaze command has also been identified in higher structures such as the caudate nucleus and the frontal cortex. 8,9 In humans, several lines of evidence support the existence of a common signal driving both eye and head movements such as the modulation of neck muscle activity by phasic and tonic oculomotor signals. 10,11 Therefore, we propose that eye-head coordination is controlled in higher mammals by a gaze motor system in which eye and head movements are exchangeable. Head movements would be inhibited in behaviors requiring an uncoupling (ie, eye movements only) and would be disinhibited otherwise, particularly when eye movements are unwanted or impossible such as in acute ophthalmoplegia. ial convulsions (BFNC). BFNC is a monogenic epilepsy characterized by a cluster of generalized seizures occurring during neonatal life and inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with high penetrance. Previous linkage analyses mapped two gene loci for BFNC to human chromosomes 20q13.3 and 8q24, 8 -11 indicating a genetically heterogeneous disorder. Accordingly, BFNC has been classified into two groups; BFNC1 (MIM 121200) which is linked to chromosome 20 and thought to be the major phenotype, and BFNC2 (MIM 121201), which is linked to chromosome 8. Recently, mutations of two KQT-like K ϩ channel genes, KCNQ2 and KCNQ3, have been identified as the underlying abnormalities of BFNC1 and BFNC2, respectively. [3][4][5] Moreover, the presence of another genetic heterogeneity in BFNC phenotype has also been indicated recently. 12 In BFNC1, various mutations in KCNQ2 have been identified. 3,5,12 In contrast, only one missense mutation of KCNQ3 has been reported in a Mexican American family with BFNC2. 4 Here we report a novel point mutation of KCNQ3 detected in a Japanese family with BFNC2.

Materials and Methods Subjects

We investigated 6 Japanese families with BFNC. The clinical features and inheritance of BFNC in affected individuals were similar to those described previously. 9 Linkage analysis was not performed because of the small population sample. One hundred unrelated healthy Japanese volunteers who did not have seizures or any episode of epilepsy were also examined as controls. Genomic DNA was prepared from EDTANa 2 -treated blood samples using SepaGene (Sanko Jyunyaku, Tokyo, Japan) based on the method described by the manufacturer.

PCR and Analysis of Products

To search for mutations of KCNQ3 in the pedigrees, 15 exons and adjacent short intronic sequences of the gene were amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with genomic DNA obtained from 1 affected individual in each of the 6 families. As an example, exon 5 of KCNQ3, which encodes the P-loop region of the channel, was amplified with primer pairs of 5Ј-GTCTGGCTCCAGCATCCACTCAACGACTCC-3Ј and 5Ј-GATGCCCTCCACCTCTCTCTGACTCTTGAC-3Ј in 50 l of GC Buffer I (Takara, Tokyo, Japan) using 30 cycles at 94°C for 1 minute, 60°C for 1 minute, and 72°C for 2.5 minutes with LA-Taq polymerase (Takara) on a thermal cycler. The sequence of primers and corresponding PCR protocols for other exons are available on request. After amplification and purification on an SR-300HR column (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Piscataway, NJ), PCR products were directly sequenced by a dye terminator sequencing method using the amplification primers on an ABI 377A auto-sequencer (Perkin Elmer Biosystems, Foster City, CA).

Amplification Refractory Mutation System

To allow a rapid detection of a T to C substitution at nucleotide 925 of the KCNQ3 cDNA sequence (c.925T3 C) described below, two sets of primers were designed for ARMS. 7,13 Reverse primers used were 5Ј-GCCTCCAAGG-TAGTGACTCAC CAGGCTCCA-3Ј for normal allele and 5Ј-GCCTCCAAGGTAGTGACTCACCAGGCA CG-3Ј for mutant allele. With 5Ј-GTCTGGCTCCAGCATCCACT-CAACGACTCC-3Ј as a common forward primer, allele specific PCR was conducted using the PCR conditions described above. Products were analyzed on 3% agarose gel, stained with ethidium bromide, and photographed. To verify the specificity of the system, plasmids bearing either the wild-type or mutant sequence at the relevant site of KCNQ3 were prepared as follows: Genomic DNA from the proband (III-5, who was confirmed to have the mutation on one of his alleles; Fig 1) was PCR amplified for exon 5 as described above. PCR products were subcloned with pCRII-TOPO Vector (Invitorgen, Carlsbad, CA). Plasmid DNA from 10 independent clones were sequenced to investigate whether they had a mutation at nucleotide 925 and whether any artificial nucleotide changes arose in the PCR process. Five clones had the wild-type sequence, and the rest had mutant sequences. No aberrant nucleotide changes were identified in the clones. Plasmids bearing the mutant and wild-type sequences were then used to test the system.

Results

All 15 exons and their adjoining regions of introns of KCNQ3 were amplified and analyzed in 1 affected individual from each of the 6 families. Bidirectional direct sequence analysis of PCR fragments flanking exon 5, which encodes part of P-loop of KCNQ3, showed that the proband of 1 family (III-5; see Fig 1) had both a T, the wild sequence, and a C at nucleotide 925 of the corresponding cDNA sequence 14 ; that is, the proband was a heterozygote (Fig 2A). The pedigree of this Japanese family indicated autosomal dominant inheritance with high penetrance for neonatal seizures. Affected individuals in the family had a cluster of seizures, which were observed as many as 20 times/day. The seizures appeared on postnatal days 8, 1, 4, 2, and 5 in II-2, III-1, III-3, III-5, and III-6, respectively (see Fig 1). Seizures commenced unilaterally and developed to generalized tonic, clonic, or tonic-clonic convulsions occasionally associated with eye deviation, apnea, tremor, and vomiting. Most seizures lasted about 30 seconds, and the longest were around 2 minutes; most were followed by drowsiness.

Seizures disappeared by 2 weeks of life and did not recur in all affected individuals except the proband and his sister (III-5 and III-6; see Fig 1 ), who had complex partial seizures with occasional secondary generalized seizures at 6 months and 3 years of age, respectively. These 2 family members were being treated with anticonvulsants at the time of the study. Episodes of febrile simple seizure were documented in 3 individuals (II-2, III-1, and III-2; see Fig 1 The amplification refractory mutation system (ARMS) was used for the rapid identification of c.925T3 C. The mutation was found in the 1 affected and 2 unaffected individuals, the proband's mother (II-6; see Fig 1 ) and maternal grandfather (I-1) in the pedigree (Fig 3). Hence, the latter 2 were considered to be obligate carriers. The segregation of mutation among family members was later confirmed by direct sequencing analyses (data not shown). These results indicate that ARMS is a useful method for detecting c.925T3 C. The accuracy of ARMS was further confirmed by the results of experiments using reference plasmids bearing either wild-type or the mutant sequence (see Fig 3). Using ARMS, we also examined 100 unrelated healthy Japanese adults. Using the primer pair for the mutant sequence, no PCR product was observed in all 200 alleles examined (data not shown). Hence, it was unlikely that c.925T3 C was one of polymorphism in KCNQ3.

Discussion

KCNQ3 is widely expressed in the central nervous system and is believed to gain its K ϩ channel function as a hetero-tetramer with KCNQ2 in the brain. 14 -16 It is suggested that KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 synergistically contribute to the formation of the native M-current, a slowly activating and deactivating K ϩ conductance that regulates the subthreshold electroexcitability of neurons. 15 Dysfunction of KCNQ2, KCNQ3, or both may therefore undermine the responsiveness of neurons to synaptic inputs. In addition, in the inner ear, KCNQ3 forms a hetero-tetramer with KCNQ4, a new member of KCNQ K ϩ family, and its mutation results in autosomal dominant nonsyndromic sensorineural deafness (MIM 603537). 17 In this study, through the screening of 6 Japanese families with BFNC phenotype, we found 1 pedigree in which affected members carried a nucleotide transition (c.925T3 C) within KCNQ3. The transition substituted Trp 309 in P-loop of KCNQ3 with an Arg (W309R). Alignment of the KCNQ K ϩ channel families demonstrated that the amino acids in P-loop are highly conserved (see Fig 2B). Among them, Trp 309 is conserved characteristically in one of the K ϩ channel signature sequences, WWGL. It is deduced that this signature amino acid sequence forms a cuff at the outer exit of the pore of the channel and holds the channel pore open. 18 hence, it can be postulated that the present mutation alters the channel architecture, thereby impairing the M-current. The electrophysiological characteristic of the mutant K ϩ channel is under investigation in our laboratories. Interestingly, a homologous mutation (W305S) of KCNQ1 was reported in Lange-Nielsen syndrome (MIM 220400), 19 a form of long-QT syndrome that may cause fatal cardiac arrhythmia and deafness (see Fig 2B).

At present, only one mutation of KCNQ3 has been reported for BFNC2, and that in a Mexican American family. The mutation was a missense mutation, a G to T transition at nucleotide 929, which replaced Gly 310 14 (previously reported as position 263) with a Val (G310V) and hence located next to W309R (see Fig 2B ). 4 Together with the observation that c.925T3 C was not found in 200 alleles of healthy volunteers, our finding indicates that c.925T3 C is the second novel mutation of KCNQ3 responsible for BFNC. This finding also suggests that BFNC2 resulting from a KCNQ3 Fig 3. Allele specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using the amplification refractory mutation system. Genomic DNAs were amplified by PCR with two sets of primer pairs, one for mutant allele and the other for normal allele. The design of primers and condition of the PCR are described in Materials and Methods. PCR products were analyzed on 3% agarose gel and stained with ethidium bromide. Allele specific PCR with either plasmid bearing a normal sequence at 925 (lanes 1 and 2) or mutant sequence at the same position (lane 3 and 4). Lanes 5 to 14 ϭ PCR amplification products using DNA of family members as indicated with codes depicted in Figure 1 Etiology and pathogenesis of dystonia are still under debate. Although no consistent brain abnormalities could be disclosed histopathologically and in routine neuroimaging studies, 1-3 we have found striking alterations of the lentiform nucleus signal using transcranial ultrasound. 2,3 This change in echo pattern may reflect an increased heavy metal tissue storage as found in neurochemical analysis of trace metals and calcium in several subcortical nuclei from 3 patients with primary adult-onset dystonia resulting in a significant increase of copper levels in the globus pallidus and putamen. 4 Copper is essential for function, gene expression, and three-dimensional configuration of numerous proteins. 5 It has been shown that a shift in copper levels may thus influence the activity of several neuronal receptors 6 -8 and consequently modulate the activity of the basal ganglia loop resulting in dystonic movements.

In this study, we further evaluated whether the increase of copper content in the lentiform nucleus in the dystonic patients is related to changes of proteins involved in copper transport and storage. Therefore, we analyzed ceruloplasmin, Wilson protein (WND), and Menkes protein (MNK) in the brain tissue of the 3 dystonic patients in whom an elevation of copper had been found. 4 

Patients and Methods

Patient Characteristics

The study was performed on postmortem material of 3 patients with sporadic primary adult-onset focal (57-and 52year-old caucasian women) or generalized dystonia (69-yearold caucasian man). Both patients with idiopathic focal dystonia suffered for many years from a spasmodic torticollis with the head turning to the right or the left side. The cause of death in these patients was attributed to multiorgan failure in the course of metastatic lung tumor, complicated pneumonia, and complications of dystonia. Neuropathological examination of the brain of these 3 patients revealed no macroscopic or microscopic abnormalities except a "vascular mineralization" as an age-related, incidental finding of unknown significance in 1 patient and a cystic parieto-occipital resection defect in the patient with metastatic lung tumor who underwent metastasis resection during her lifetime. The brain tissue was provided by the Brain and Tissue Bank for Developmental Disorders, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD. For comparison, three brains of controls without any evidence for neurological disorders prior to death and normal neuropathological autopsy reports were examined.

Tissue Preparation

On autopsy, all brains were removed and divided midsagitally. The left half was immediately immersed in isopentane dry ice; the other half was fixed for 6 weeks in 10% formalin. Tissue preparation was performed when the temperature of the brain had risen to Ϫ10°C. After the brain was coronally sectioned into slices approximately 10 mm thick, 100to 150-mg samples of frozen tissue of the putamen were dissected. In addition, we received tissue samples of the globus pallidus in 2 of the 3 patients (1 with focal and 1 with generalized dystonia).

The formalin-fixed hemisphere was examined using routine neuropathological methods. With hematoxylin-eosin staining, the following areas were examined: frontal cortex, cerebellum, hippocampus, caudate nucleus, putamen, thalamus, and brainstem. The time between death and autopsy ranged from 5 to 32 hours.

Analysis of MNK, WND, and Ceruloplasmin Protein in Frozen Putaminal and Globus Pallidus Tissue

Frozen brain tissue samples were homogenized in purified buffered saline (PBS), 1% Triton X-100 solution containing protease inhibitors (complete protease inhibitor tablets; Boehringer, Mannheim, Germany). Insoluble material was pelleted by centrifugation. Equal amounts of proteins of the supernatants (100 g) were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose. 9 Unspecific binding sites were blocked by incubation with PBS, 0.1% Tween 20 containing 2.5% nonfat milk. Nitrocellulose was incubated either with well-characterized polyclonal rabbit or mouse antibodies recognizing human MNK 10 or WND, 11 or polyclonal goat antibodies recognizing human ceruloplasmin (Sigma, Deisenhofen, Germany). As control proteins we used lysed Escherichia coli cells expressing MNK 10 or commercially available ceruloplasmin (Sigma). Blots were developed using secondary antibodies coupled to peroxidase and 3,3Ј-diaminobenzidine/H 2 O 2 solution.

Quantitation of bands was performed densitometrically with the aid of Gel-Pro Analyzer software (version 2.0; Media Cybernetics, Silver Spring, MD). The interesting lanes and bands were marked, boundaries were adjusted, and the concentration of loaded protein was determined by densitrometric measurements within the regions of interest. Using equal protein amounts for Western blots, we compared densitometric data of patients and controls.

Results

MNK was identified with the expected size of approximately 178 kd 10 (Fig, A). In addition, the 57-kd spliced product of MNK 10 was observed in the putamen and globus pallidus of controls and dystonic patients. The full-length product as well as the splice product showed a lower band intensity in the dystonic patients compared with the controls (Table ; see Fig, A). This is particularly evident in the patient with generalized dystonia, in whom MNK was hardly visible. Results of the Western bot analysis were similar for the putamen and globus pallidus.

WND was identified in all samples at the expected size of 175 to 180 kd 11 (see Fig, B). A higher band intensity was visible in both patients with idiopathic focal dystonia compared with the controls in both lentiform nuclei. In the patient with generalized dystonia, the WND band was less well visible (see Table ).

The same pattern of band intensity was observed for ceruloplasmin at the expected size of 132 kd 12 (see Fig, C). An increase in the intensity of the ceruloplasmin band was observed in patients with focal dystonia when compared with the controls, whereas the band of the patient with generalized dystonia was only faintly visible (see Table ). Findings obtained from putaminal and globus pallidus tissue were identical. Densitometric data of these Western blots are summarized in the Table.

Discussion

Our analysis of copper-transporting proteins and ceruloplasmin in putaminal tissue supports the hypothesis of an alteration of copper metabolism in primary adultonset dystonia. All patients showed a reduced MNK band intensity (full-length product as well as the 57-kd form) in Western blot analysis. This points toward a reduced MNK content in the putamen and globus pallidus. Pattern of changes of the WND and ceruloplasmin proteins appeared to be somewhat different in focal and generalized dystonia. An increased band intensity of WND and ceruloplasmin was observed in both patients with focal dystonia. The patient with generalized dystonia displayed a fainter band intensity of both proteins. Since postmortem tissue of dystonic patients is rare, our data are based on only 3 patients with primary dystonia. The present findings therefore warrant further detailed investigations-specifically, a quantification of the amounts of proteins in a larger patient sample.

As all 3 patients with primary dystonia have reduced MNK, one may speculate that the increased copper content identified in brain tissue of patients with primary dystonia is related to a MNK deficiency resulting in a disturbance of cellular copper transport. MNK, an integral membrane protein, is expressed in most tissues except the liver. 13,14 It is localized in the trans-Golgi network, where it transports copper into the lumen of the Golgi complex for incorporation into enzymes. 10,15,16 At higher copper levels, MNK exports intracellular copper out of the cell. A reduced expression of MNK can therefore result in intracellular copper excess primarily affecting the brain. Another means of copper export from the cell is through the synthesis of holoceruloplasmin, which requires interaction with WND. 17 Our findings are consistent with the view that the increased band intensity of WND and ceruloplasmin identified in both patients with focal dystonia may be a sign of overexpression to compensate for the MNK deficiency by recruitment of alternative pathways for cellular copper export and by increasing the capacity of copper storage. The capacity to induce such compensatory mechanisms may be limited in patients with a more severe (generalized) form of dystonia corresponding to the finding of reduced WND and ceruloplasmin band intensities.

Copper is a potent inhibitor of currents mediated by GABA, glutamate, or opiate receptors. 6 -8 These receptors are highly expressed in the lentiform nucleus. Copper interaction with these receptors might lead to a net decrease of inhibitory output from the lentiform nucleus, which fits well into the pathophysiological concept of a disinhibition of the thalamus resulting in an overexcitation of the cortex in dystonia. 18 Our preliminary data on brain tissue analysis of 3 patients with primary adult-onset dystonia suggest that primary dystonia is related to a disturbance of copper metabolism, which might be induced by a reduction or malfunction of the MNK. Our findings suggest that the cellular copper excess and copper export are affected in a similar fashion in Menkes disease and primary dystonia. However, this does not imply that both disorders are biochemically identical. Menkes disease is caused by a X chromosomal disruption of the ATP7A gene resulting in a severe impairment of cellular copper export of the intestinal cells. The inability of the cells to transport copper from the intestinum into the body leads to a severe reduction of body copper content and a deficiency of the copper-dependent enzymes. 19 Phenotypically, Menkes disease and dystonia have no similarity, although milder forms of Menkes diseases with extrapyramidal movements disorders have been described. 20 Therefore, we have to consider whether a reduction of MNK (qualitative or quantitative) in dystonia instead of a complete loss of function as seen in Menkes disease may explain the phenotypical differences of both disorders. On the other hand, the alteration in copper-transporting proteins in dystonic patients-unlike the situation in Menkes disease-may not reflect the primary disease mechanism but rather may represent the consequence of an as yet unidentified primary pathology.

This study was supported by research grants from the Siemens AG, Erlangen, Germany, and Schering Deutschland GmbH, Berlin, Germany. 

We thank Dr K Ichikawa, Yahata Municipal Hospital, Dr T Nishimi, St Mary's Hospital, and Dr T Fujimoto, Fujimoto Children's Hospital, for collecting the cerebrospinal fluid samples.

We thank Prof F. M. S. Tome ´for critical comments on the manuscript, Sergio Daniel for technical assistance, and Don Ward for help with the English. This work was supported by Telethon, Italy (grant 1093 to L.M.), by the Italian Ministry of Health, and by the Association Franc ¸aise contre les Myopathies.

This study was supported in part by grants from Ministry of Education, Science and Culture of Japan (09470206 to S.K.), the Epilepsy Research Foundation (to S.H. and A.M.), Japan, and the Mother and Child Foundation (to S.H., K.S., and A.M.), Japan.

We are indebted to all members of the families for their helpful cooperation in this study. We thank Yumiko Oka for manuscript preparation and Hiroshi Hashimoto (Hokkaido System Science Co, Ltd) for his help in designing primers for PCR. We also thank Drs Yoshio Misumi and Yukio Ikehara (Fukuoka University) for their continuous support.

We thank Prof H. Ronald Zielke, Department of Pediatrics, University of Maryland, Baltimore, for his continued and substantial support and critical review of the manuscript. We are also indebted to the Dystonia Medical Research Foundation, Chicago, IL, for the coordination of the dystonia tissue donor program. We gratefully acknowledge Prof K. V. Toyka and Dr F. X. Weilback for their substantial support.

This research was supported in part by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (C) and grant 8A-8B-16 from the National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry of the Ministry of Health and Welfare, Japan.

Appendix

Electronic Database Information

Fig.Fig. Synthesis and catabolism of phenylethylamine and dopamine. DOPA ϭ 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine; AADC ϭ aromatic amino acid decarboxylase; MAO-B ϭ monoamine oxidase type B; ADH ϭ aldehyde dehydrogenase DBH ϭ dopamine ␤-hydroxylase.

Parkinson's Disease: A Positron Emission Tomography Study with a Dopamine Transporter Ligand [ 18 F]CFT E. Nurmi, MD,* H. M. Ruottinen, MD, PhD,* V. Kaasinen, MD, PhD,* J. Bergman, MSc, † M. Haaparanta, MSc, † O. Solin, PhD, † and J. O. Rinne, MD, PhD* We studied the rate of progression of striatal dopamine transporter function in Parkinson's disease (PD). Eight patients with early PD without antiparkinsonian medication and 7 healthy volunteers were investigated with [ 18 F]CFT positron emission tomography (PET). The PET scan was carried out twice at an approximate 2-year interval. The uptake of [ 18 F]CFT was calculated as a region-cerebellum:cerebellum ratio at 180 to 210 minutes after injection. At the first PET scan, the [ 18 F]CFT uptake in PD patients in the putamen was 1.45 ؎ 0.45 (mean ؎ SD) (42% of the control mean) and 2.43 ؎ 0.59 in the caudate nucleus (76% of the control mean). The ratios declined by the time of the second PET scan, and the rate of annual decline of the baseline mean in PD patients was 13.1% in the putamen and 12.5% in the caudate nucleus. In controls, the corresponding figures were 2.1% for the putamen and 2.9% for the caudate nucleus. The decline in [ 18 F]CFT uptake was significantly higher in PD patients than in controls. Thus, dopamine transporter ligands such as [ 18 F]CFT seem to be sensitive markers for the rate of progression in PD. Nurmi E, Ruottinen HM, Kaasinen V, Bergman J, Haaparanta M, Solin O, Rinne JO. Progression in Parkinson's disease: a positron emission tomography study with a dopamine transporter ligand [ 18 F]CFT. Ann Neurol 2000;47:804 -808

[ 18 F18]-labeled CFT (2␤-carbomethoxy-3␤-[4-fluorophenyl] tropane) (or WIN 35,428) was synthesized by electrophilic fluorination of 2␤-carbomethoxy-3-(4-trimethylstannyl-phenyl)tropane (RBI, Natick, MA). [ 18 F]acetylhypofluorite synthesized from [ 18 F]fluorine was used for the destannylation reaction. High specific radioactivity electrophilic [ 18 F]fluorine was synthesized from [

Fig.Fig. Electron microphotograph cross sections. (A) Over 70% of the myelin sheaths demonstrate widenings of their lamellae. Bar ϭ 2 m. (B) On high magnification, the widenings seem to correspond to a dissociation of the intraperiodic lamellae. These aspects are identical to those commonly observed in IgM neuropathies with anti-MAG activity, but they may affect any lamellae. Bar ϭ 0.1 m. (C) Ultrathin cryosections immunostained with IgA antibody and immunogold procedures. IgA is detected specifically at the level of the widenings of the myelin lamellae. Bar ϭ 0.3 m.

Fig 2 .2Fig 2. Laminin ␣2 chain immunolocalization with antibody recognizing the 300-kd fragment (a and b) and antibody recognizing the 80-kd fragment (c and d) in a control (a and c) and in the patient (b and d). Laminin ␣2 chain immunoblot with antibody recognizing the 300-kd fragment (e) and antibody recognizing the 80-kd fragment (f ) in the patient (lane 1) and a normal subject (lane 2). (Original magnification, ϫ250 before 40% reduction.)

Fig 3 .3Fig 3. Single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis of exons 29 (a) and 31 (b) in the patient and his family. The sequences of the abnormal conformers of these exons are shown (c and d) in comparison with those of a control subject.

Eggers C, Stuerenburg HJ, Schafft T, Zo ¨llner B, Feucht HH, Stellbrink HJ, van Lunzen J. Rapid clearance of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 from ventricular cerebrospinal fluid during antiretroviral treatment. Ann Neurol 2000;47:816-819

Fig 22Fig 2. Phylogenetic tree of virus derived from the patient (blood and ventricular and lumbar cerebrospinal fluid) in relation to seven closely related published human immunodeficiency virus subtypes. The dendrogram was constructed by aligning the V3 loop sequences of our patient withpublished sequences using the PHYLIP package.15   According to their high degree of sequence homology (see text), the patient's isolates cluster together.

Study supported by an unrestricted grant by Glaxo Wellcome, Hamburg, Germany. A Common Mechanism for the Control of Eye and Head Movements in Humans B. Gaymard, MD, PhD,* † I. Siegler, ‡ S. Rivaud-Pe ´choux, PhD,* I. Israel, PhD, ‡ C. Pierrot-Deseilligny, MD,* and A. Berthoz, PhD ‡

Gaymard B, Siegler I, Rivaud-Pe ´choux S, Israel I, Pierrot-Deseilligny C, Berthoz A. A common mechanism for the control of eye and head movements in humans. Ann Neurol 2000;47:819 -822

Fig 1 .1Fig 1. T2-weighted MRI scan of the patient showing a bilateral lesion in the pontine tegmentum adjacent to the floor of the forth ventricle, which involves both abducens nuclei (arrow).

Fig 1 .1Fig 1. Pedigree of the Japanese family with benign familial neonatal convulsions type 2. Solid symbols ϭ affected individuals; open symbols ϭ unaffected individuals; squares ϭ males; circles ϭ females; symbols with a center dot ϭ carriers; Eϩ ϭ individuals in whom genetic analysis of KCNQ3was performed and were found to have a c.925T3 C mutation; EϪ ϭ individuals in whom genetic analysis of KCNQ3 was performed and were found to be free of the mutation. All nomenclatures used for the description of the pedigree are based on the report of Bennett and associates.20    

Fig 3. Allele specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using the amplification refractory mutation system. Genomic DNAs were amplified by PCR with two sets of primer pairs, one for mutant allele and the other for normal allele. The design of primers and condition of the PCR are described in Materials and Methods. PCR products were analyzed on 3% agarose gel and stained with ethidium bromide. Allele specific PCR with either plasmid bearing a normal sequence at 925 (lanes 1 and 2) or mutant sequence at the same position (lane 3 and 4). Lanes 5 to 14 ϭ PCR amplification products using DNA of family members as indicated with codes depicted in Figure1; odd numbers ϭ PCR products amplified for normal allele; even numbers with a circle ϭ PCR products for mutant allele bearing c.925T3 C; Mr ϭ DNA sizing markers.

Fig.Fig. Western blot analysis of the Menkes protein from putaminal brain tissue of 3 controls and 3 patients with primary adult-onset dystonia. (A) Comparison of densitometry of the Menkes protein band intensity in patients and controls revealed a 28% and 55% reduction of signal intensity in focal dystonia and a 88% signal reduction in generalized dystonia. (B) Densitometric analysis of the Wilson protein band intensity in patients and controls revealed a 148% and 28% increase in focaland a 52% signal reduction in generalized dystonia. (C) Densitometric analysis of the ceruloplasmin protein band intensity in patients and controls revealed a 171% and a 78% increase in focal and a 71% reduction in generalized dystonia.

Table 1 .1Cerebrospinal Fluid Levels of ␤-Phenylethylamine (PEA) in Patients with Rett SyndromePatientAgeSelf-PEANo.(mo)StageAnticonvulsantsAbuseDQHyperventilationApnea(pg/ml)14 1I IϪϩϽ 20ϪϪ221.522 3I IϪϩϽ 20ϩϩ368.233 6I IϪϪϽ 20ϪϪ150.043 6I IϪϪ25ϩϩ507.154 2I IϪϪϽ 20ϪϪ93.265 0I ICϪϽ 20ϪϪ28.672 3I ICϪϽ 20ϪϪ139.583 4I IPϪ29ϩϩ155.292 6I IϪϪϽ 20ϩϩ24.11071IIIVϪϽ 20ϩϩ295.51161IIIϪϪϽ 20ϩϩ978.01251IIIV, CϪϽ 20ϩϩ282.71359IIIV, CϪϽ 20ϩϩ958.91469IIIϪϪϽ 20ϩϩ219.71573IIIϪϪϽ 20ϩϩ29.11665IIIϪϪϽ 20ϩϩ155.217137IVϪϪϽ 20ϩϩ276.3DQ ϭ developmental quotient; C ϭ carbamazepine; P ϭ phenobarbital; V ϭ valproic acid.

Table 2 .2Cerebrospinal Fluid Levels of ␤-Phenylethylamine (PEA) in Children with Rett Syndrome, Epilepsy,Autistic Disorder, and ControlnPEA (pg/ml)Range (pg/ml)Rett syndrome17 287.2 Ϯ 285.924.1-978.0Epilepsy with MR4 612.2 Ϯ 221.1 299.8-792.5Autistic disorder5 570.6 Ϯ 441.6 158.3-1,424.5Control13 936.2 Ϯ 519.1 404.6-1,902.0MR ϭ mental retardation.

C]␤-CFT (or [ 11 C]WIN 35,428), [ 11 C]RTI-32, [ 18 F]CFT, [ 11 C]nomifensine, [ 11 C]-O [ 123 I]␤-CIT, and [ 123

18  

Table . The.Clinical Characteristics and [ 18 F]CFT Uptake Values of the Patients with Parkinson's DiseasePatient No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 a At the time of the first positron emission tomography scan. Sex Age a (yr) Duration c (yr) Caudate d I a II b I a M 76 1.7 2.23 1.45 1.17 0.77 Putamen d II b M 50 2.0 1.84 1.15 1.18 0.91 M 47 0.2 2.37 2.16 1.43 1.18 F 64 2.0 2.61 1.75 1.48 1.03 M 66 2.0 3.30 2.11 2.06 1.38 M 61 6.0 1.51 1.38 0.69 0.56 F 65 1.6 3.07 1.80 2.00 1.07 M 61 1.2 2.48 2.42 1.56 1.41 b At the time of the second PET scan. c Duration of symptoms as reported by the patients. d Region-cerebellum: cerebellum ratio of [ 18 F] CFT. UPDRS ϭ Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale motor score. Brief Communication: Nurmi et al: [ 18 F]CFT in Progression of PD 805 UPDRS Score Medication I a II b 18 22 Selegiline, anticholinergic medication 17 19 Dopamine agonist, selegiline, anticholinergic medication 9 17 Anticholinergic medication 12 25 Levodopa, selegiline, anticholinergic medication 34 37 Levodopa, dopamine agonist 31 48 Levodopa, dopamine agonist 28 53 Levodopa 15 35 Anticholinergic medication ( p Ͻ 0.05) in the caudate nucleus. The mean [ 18 F]CFT uptake values at the first and second PET scans in patients and controls are shown in Figure 1, and the individual [ 18 F]CFT uptake values are pre-sented in the Table15318249, 2000, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/1531-8249(200006)47:6<811::AID-ANA16>3.0.CO;2-9 by University Of Illinois At Urbana Champaign, Wiley Online Library on [10/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

correlates with symptom severity in Parkinson's disease. Ann Neurol 1995;38:589 -598 17. Booij J, Tissingh G, Boer GJ, et al. [ 123 I]FP-CIT SPECT shows a pronounced decline of striatal dopamine transporter labelling in early and advanced Parkinson's disease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1997;62:133-140 18. Haaparanta M, Bergman J, Laakso A, et al. [ 18 F]CFT ([ 18 F]WIN 35,428), a radioligand to study the dopamine transporter with PET: biodistribution in rats. Synapse 1996;23:321-327 19. Laakso A, Bergman J, Haaparanta M, et al. [ 18 F]CFT ([ 18 F]WIN 35,428), a radioligand to study the dopamine transporter with PET: characterization in human subjects. Synapse 1998;28:244 -250 20. Bergman J, Solin O. Fluorine-18-labeled fluorine gas for synthesis of tracer molecules. Nucl Med Biol 1997;24:677-683 21. Marek K, Innis R, Fussell B, et al. [ 123 I]CIT and SPECT: an imaging biomarker of Parkinson's disease progression. Neurology 1999;50(Suppl 4):329 (Abstract) 22. Wilson JM, Levey AI, Rajput A, et al. Differential changes in neurochemical markers of striatal dopamine nerve terminals in idiopathic Parkinson's disease. Neurology 1996;47:718 -7261. Brooks DJ, Salmon EP, Mathias CJ, et al. The relationship be-tween locomotor disability, autonomic dysfunction and the in-tegrity of the striatal dopaminergic system in patients with mul-tiple system atrophy, pure autonomic failure and Parkinson's disease, studied with PET. Brain 1990;113:1539 -1552 2. Leenders KL, Antonini A, Vontobel P, et al. [ 18 F]fluorodopa/ PET studies of the PD rate of progression. Mov Disord 1998; 13:(Suppl 2):108 (Abstract) 3. Morrish PK, Rakshi JS, Bailey DL, et al. Measuring the rate of progression and estimating the preclinical period of Parkinson's disease with [ -124 13. Laihinen A, Rinne JO, Någren K, et al. PET studies on brain monoamine transporters with [ 11 C]␤-CIT in Parkinson's dis-ease. J Nucl Med 1995;36:1263-1267 14. Guttman M, Burkholder J, Kish SJ, et al. [ 11 C]RTI-32 PET studies of the dopamine transporter in early dopa-naive Parkin-son's disease: implications for the symptomatic threshold. Neu-rology 1997;48:1578 -1583 with Parkinson's disease at the beginning of the disease (left) and 2 years later (right). Note the reduced [ 18 F]CFT uptake in the striatum contralateral to the predominant symptoms and the further decline in both the putamen and caudate nucleus in the second PET image. Images are scaled to equal reference region radioactivity concen-trations. Myelin Widenings and MGUS-IgA: An Immunoelectron 15. Fig 2. [ 18 F]CFT PET images of a patient Microscopic Study18  F]dopa PET. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1998;64:314 -319 4. Vingerhoets FJG, Snow BJ, Lee CS, et al. Longitudinal fluorodopa positron emission tomographic studies of the evolution of idiopathic parkinsonism. Ann Neurol 1994;36:759 -764 5. Tedroff J, Aquilonius S-M, Hartvig P, et al. Monoamine reuptake sites in the human brain evaluated in vivo by means of 11 C-nomifensine and positron emission tomography: the effects of age and Parkinson's disease. Acta Neurol Scand 1988;77: 192-201 6. Leenders KL, Salmon EP, Tyrrell P, et al. The nigrostriatal dopaminergic system assessed in vivo by positron emission tomography in healthy volunteer subjects and patients with Parkinson's disease. Arch Neurol 1990;47:1290 -1298 7. Frost JJ, Rosier AJ, Reich SG, et al. Positron emission tomographic imaging of the dopamine transporter with 11 C-WIN 35,428 reveals marked declines in mild Parkinson's disease. Ann Neurol 1993;43:423-431 8. Innis RB, Seibyl JP, Scanley BE, et al. Single photon emission computed tomographic imaging demonstrates loss of striatal dopamine transporters in Parkinson's disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993;90:11965-11969 9. Bru ¨cke T, Asenbaum S, Pozzera A, et al. Dopaminergic nerve cell loss in Parkinson's disease quantified with [I-123]-␤-CIT and SPECT correlates with clinical findings. Mov Disord 1994; 9(Suppl 1):120 (Abstract) 10. Rinne JO, Laihinen A, Någren K, et al. PET examination of the monoamine transporter with [ 11 C]␤-CIT and [ 11 C]␤-CFT in early Parkinson's disease. Synapse 1995;21:97-103 11. Rinne JO, Kuikka JT, Bergstro ¨m KA, et al. Striatal dopamine transporter in Parkinson's disease: a study with a new radioligand, [ 123 I]␤-CIT-FP. Parkinsonism and Related Disorders 1997;3:77-81 12. Rinne JO, Bergman J, Ruottinen H, et al. Striatal uptake of a novel PET ligand, [ 18 F]␤-CFT, is reduced in early Parkinson's disease. Synapse 1999;31:119 Rinne JO, Kuikka JT, Bergstro ¨m KA, Rinne UK. Striatal dopamine transporter in different disability stages of Parkinson's disease studied with [ 123 I]␤-CIT SPECT. Parkinsonism and Related Disorders 1995;1:47-52 16. Seibyl JP, Marek KL, Quinlan D, et al. Decreased single photon emission computed tomographic [ 123 I]␤-CIT striatal up-Brief Communication: Nurmi et al: [ 18 F]CFT in Progression of PD 807 take Jean-Michel Vallat, MD,* Franc ¸ois Tabaraud, MD,* Philippe Sindou, PhD,* Pierre-Marie Preux, MD,* Antoon Vandenberghe, PhD, † and Andreas Steck, MD ‡

Table . Sensory.Potentials Obtained in the Four LimbsCV (m/sec)DA (mV)DML (msec)F Wave (msec)TLIPeroneal Right Left17.0 9.80.7 a 0.3 a15.1 14.5No No0.35 0.63Normal52.0 Ϯ 6.25.1 Ϯ 2.34.5 Ϯ 0.847.7 Ϯ 4.0Ն0.25Tibial Right Left21.1 17.30.3 a 0.4 a16.5 18.8No No0.45 0.48Normal48.5 Ϯ 3.65.8 Ϯ4.7 Ϯ 0.947.7 Ϯ 5.0Ն0.251.9Median (elbow-wrist) Right Left27.7 41.94.3 a 4.4 a12.0 11.355.0 50.70.2 0.13Normal56.7 Ϯ 3.813.2 Ϯ 5.03.7 Ϯ 0.326.6 Ϯ 2.7Ն0.25Ulnar Right Left20.6 28.44 a 1.7 a10.0 6.4No No0.36 0.33Normal61.0 Ϯ 5.55.7 Ϯ 2.02.6 Ϯ 0.427.2 Ϯ 2.5Ն0.25a No conduction block after proximal stimulation but temporal dispersion of compound muscle action potential. CV ϭ conduction velocity; DA ϭ distal amplitude; DML ϭ distal motor latency; TLI ϭ terminal latency index. Brief Communication: Vallat et al: MGUS-IgA Neuropathy 809 15318249, 2000, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/1531-8249(200006)47:6<811::AID-ANA16>3.0.CO;2-9 by University Of Illinois At Urbana Champaign, Wiley Online Library on [10/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

15318249, 2000, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/1531-8249(200006)47:6<811::AID-ANA16>3.0.CO;2-9 by University Of Illinois At Urbana Champaign, Wiley Online Library on [10/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Table . Average.Latency and Velocity of 20°Head and Eye Visually Guided Saccades , 2000, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/1531-8249(200006)47:6<811::AID-ANA16>3.0.CO;2-9 by University Of Illinois At Urbana Champaign, Wiley Online Library on [10/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons LicenseLatency, msec (SD)VelocityGapOverlap(degrees per sec)20°head saccades aR310 (39)408 (46)56.2 (15.2)L 20°eye saccades b321 (43)404 (38)R222 (28)302 (38)266.0 (18.4)L212 (17)272 (29)a Head saccades were recorded at the acute stage. b Eye saccades were recorded in a head-fixed condition after recovery.R ϭ right; L ϭ left.Fig 2. Patient's recordings of horizontal headand eye movements during head-free reading.At the acute stage (head-free condition), thereare typical staircase head movements and anabsence of significant horizontal eye move-ments. After recovery (head-fixed condition),there is a striking reversal in the pattern ofmovements between the eyes and the head.1 ϭ rightward progression saccade, 2 ϭ large leftward regression saccade (return sweep), 3 ϭ blink artifact. Brief Communication: Gaymard et al: Eye-Head Coordination 821 15318249

), which did not cosegregate with BFNC. Intellectual delay was not evident in any of the family members.This T to C substitution (c.925T3 C) is at the first Alignment of amino acids in P-loop of the KCNQ K ϩ channel family. Part of amino acid sequences of the P-loop region of the human KCNQ K ϩ channel family is aligned. Rectangular box ϭ one of the signature amino acid sequences of the family, LWWG; circles ϭ amino acids for which their mutation cause the following disorders: KCNQ1 (long QT syndrome), KCNQ2base of a Trp at position 309 14 (homologue to Trp at305, 270, and 276 of KCNQ1, KCNQ2, and KCNQ4,respectively) within P-loop of KCNQ3 (see Fig 2B).Trp 309 is consequently replaced by an Arg (W309G)(see Fig 2A). No other nucleotide substitution, inser-tion, or deletion was found. In other families that wereinvestigated, no mutation was found within the exam-ined region of KCNQ3.Fig 2. (A) Nucleotide sequence of the relevant region of exon 5 of the proband. Genomic DNA from the proband was amplifiedfor exon 5 of KCNQ3 by PCR. The nucleotide sequences of the products were determined by the dye terminator cycle sequencingmethod in an ABI auto-sequencer. (Left) The nucleotide sequence determined in 5Ј to 3Ј direction. (Right) Nucleotide sequencesdetermined in 3Ј to 5Ј direction. Arrows indicate nucleotide 925, where a T to C transition, in 5Ј to 3Ј direction, occurred.(B) (benign familial neonatal convulsions type 1; BFNC1), KCNQ4 (autosomal dominant nonsyndromic sensorineural deafness);shaded box ϭ Trp residue (W) replaced with an Arg (R) in affected individuals in one family with BFNC2; shaded circle ϭ aGly residue (G) reported previously to be replaced with a Val (V) in a Mexican-American family with BFNC2.

Table . Densitometric.Data of Western Blot Analysis of Menkes Protein (MNK), Wilson Protein (WND), and Ceruloplasmin in Controls, 2 Patients with Focal Dystonia, and 1 Patient with Generalized DystoniaRelative units given as mean Ϯ SD.Focal DystoniaGeneralizedControlsDystonia(n ϭ 3)Patient 1Patient 2(n ϭ 1)MNK125 Ϯ 1189.956.215.3WND24.6 Ϯ 15.561.531.711.7Ceruloplasmin56.3 Ϯ 39.3152.299.515.5

