Verruca vulgaris following treatment of vitiligo with epidermal grafting

amphotericin B and 5-flucytosine should be considered for infections caused by P. variotii, whereas P. lilacinus and P. marquandii may be more susceptible to the imidazoles. 1   This case of hyalohyphomycosis caused by P. marquandii highlights the increasing significance of opportunistic telluric fungi in immunosuppressed patients.

Sir, Epidermal grafting with suction blisters is used in treatment of stable vitiligo. Previous reports have shown various complications including postinflammatory hyperpigmentation, peripheral hypopigmentation and hypertrophic scarring. 1 However, the risk of infection has not been reported to date. We report an unusual case of verruca vulgaris that appeared after epidermal grafting. It seems likely that virus particles might have been transferred from the operator, who had verruca vulgaris on his hand, to the patient during the surgical procedure.

A 12-year-old girl with localized stable vitiligo was treated by epidermal grafting. Blisters on the recipient site formed within 24 h after three freeze±thaw cycles with liquid nitrogen. Blisters on the donor site were made by suction on the inner portion of the thigh. After approximately 3 h of suction at 200 mmHg, large unilocular bullae appeared. After removal of the blisters at the recipient site, the epidermal sheets were grafted to the denuded recipient site and held in place. Two weeks after grafting, once weekly systemic psoralen-ultraviolet A treatment was started. Almost complete repigmentation was observed 3 months after grafting. Four months after grafting, the patient noticed two verrucous plaques in the grafted site (Fig. 1). She denied warts on any other body sites. There was no history of similar lesions in her family or close friends. The operator, who wore gloves, had a verrucous papule on his hand during the surgery. Skin biopsy of two different lesions, on the patient's back and the operator's hand, demonstrated histological features of verruca vulgaris. Human papillomavirus (HPV) typing was not performed.

Although epidermal grafting appears to be an effective and safe method for the treatment of vitiligo, various complications have been reported, 1±2 of which some are associated with the application of liquid nitrogen, such as postinflammatory hyperpigmentation, hypertrophic scarring, peripheral hypopigmentation and uneven pigmentation. Koebner phenomenon and recurrence have also been considered complications of epidermal grafting.

The possibility of transmission of virus from patient to patient or from patient to doctor has been reported. One study showed that virus may survive on a cotton swab dipped into liquid nitrogen and suggested that virus transmission from patient to patient may occur via this route. 3 Charles and Sire 4 reported the possibility of transmission of papovavirus indirectly by cotton-tipped applicators which had been used earlier to treat verruca in other patients. In our case, the same liquid nitrogen and cotton-tipped applicators were not used for multiple patients. Bergbrant et al. 5 reported that there is a risk of contamination of the operator by HPV DNA, during both carbon dioxide laser and electrocoagulation treatment.

Once an individual has been infected, new warts may develop in sites of inoculation over a period of weeks to months. 6 After experimental HPV inoculation, it requires from 2 to 9 months for a verruca to become clinically apparent. This observation implies a relatively long period of subclinical infection. In our patient, the verruca appeared 4 months after grafting. It is unclear whether the verruca vulgaris resulted from direct contact with the operator's hand during the surgical procedure, or with another person after grafting. However, there are several possible mechanisms of viral transmission from the operator to the patient: the operator may have palpated the lesion with his bare hand immediately after cryosurgery to evaluate the effectiveness of the freezing, or transmission may have occurred during application of a dressing after surgery. We suggest that the risk of transmission of infection from doctor to patient should be considered as a new complication of epidermal grafting.  

Trichilemmal carcinoma with a cutaneous horn

Sir, An 83-year-old woman presented with a 6-month history of a 1-cm diameter skin lesion on the forehead (Fig. 1a). The lesion had gradually increased in size and had bled recurrently. Examination showed a tender dome-shaped crusted nodule with a cutaneous horn. Histopathologically there was multiple lobular or trabecular proliferation of tumour cells beneath some crusting, but also marked hyperkeratosis (Fig. 1b). At the periphery of each lobule, the cells were in a palisading arrangement and became swollen toward the central area, with a pale eosinophilic or clear cytoplasm. Most tumour cells showed nuclear atypia or pleomorphism and some had mitotic figures. The clear cytoplasm of the tumour cells contained periodic acid±Schiff (PAS)-positive diastasesensitive material. On immunohistochemical staining, there was positivity for high molecular weight cytokeratin and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), but negative results for carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), S-100 and low molecular weight cytokeratin. Total excision was done under the diagnosis of trichilemmal carcinoma, and the patient has been free of recurrence or metastasis to date. Trichilemmal carcinoma is an uncommon cutaneous neoplasm which occurs in sun-exposed areas of aged persons. It is thought to originate from the external root sheath (trichilemma) of the hair follicle. 1 Despite the frequent presence of histologically malignant features, it has a relatively benign clinical behaviour. 2 The tumour typically manifests as a single, superficial nodule, measuring less than 2 cm, and commonly undergoes ulceration. Microscopically, trichilemmal carcinoma consists of relatively well-circumscribed multiple lobules or trabeculae with a peripheral palisade of basaloid cells. The prominent tumoral cells are polygonal, with abundant clear or pale, PAS-positive, diastase-sensitive cytoplasm. Striking cytological atypia and a high mitotic index are usually present. 2 Trichilemmal keratinization, characterized by abrupt keratinization without a granular layer, is a characteristic finding. 3 Variable degrees of basilar or fullthickness interfollicular epidermal spread, with an abrupt or pagetoid interface with adjacent, cytologically unremarkable keratinocytes, can be seen. Dermal invasion, typically extending into the reticular dermis, accompanied by a plasma cell-rich lymphocytic infiltrate, can also be found. 4 Immunohistochemically, trichilemmal carcinoma is positive on staining with PAS and with stains for high molecular weight cytokeratin, but usually negative for CEA and EMA. In our case, positivity for EMA was observed, which has been reported previously. 2 The term `cutaneous horn' has been used to describe either the morphological or microscopic epithelial changes that may be present overlying certain benign, premalignant and malignant lesions such as actinic keratoses, seborrhoeic keratoses, squamous cell carcinomas and verrucae vulgares. Trichilemmal keratosis (trichilemmal horn), a benign variant of trichilemmal carcinoma, is a keratinizing tumour which resembles a cutaneous horn or a hyperkeratotic actinic keratosis. Histologically, the lesion shows epithelial lobules composed of pale-staining keratinocytes. A few germinal buds are noted proliferating from the periphery of the epithelial lobule, and there is margination of the basal cells at the periphery of the lobule. Also, there is verrucous hyperplasia and prominent orthokeratosis that is characterized by an abrupt transformation of the keratinocytes into the lamellar keratin without the formation of a granular layer. 4 The differential diagnosis of trichilemmal carcinoma from other malignant clear cell tumours of the skin is necessary. The distinction from clear cell squamous cell carcinoma is based primarily upon the architectural pattern rather than cytological findings. In clear cell squamous cell carcinoma, there is absence of trichilemmal keratinization, a peripheral palisade of basaloid cells, and cytoplasmic glycogen. 3±5 Clear cell basal cell carcinoma may mimic trichilemmal carcinoma, but areas of clear cell change often involve only a minor portion of an otherwise conventional basal cell carcinoma. Sebaceous carcinomas show tumour lobules composed of eosinophilic cells at their peripheries, vacuolated or clear cells at their centres, and absence of PAS positivity. Demonstration of cytoplasmic lipid by special stains or by electron microscopy supports the diagnosis. 3,5 Malignant proliferating trichilemmal tumour may be essentially identical to trichilemmal carcinoma, but the former is more keratinized and has a stronger tendency toward metastasis than the latter. Clear cell eccrine carcinoma may also be confused with trichilemmal carcinoma, but is distinguished by the absence of foci showing abrupt keratinization and by lack of peripheral palisading of the clear cells, with prominent subnuclear vacuolization. 5 The most difficult differential diagnoses are those of actinic keratosis and Bowen's disease. Clinical and histological findings suggest that these lesions may be aetiologically related. Actinic keratosis is thought to be involved in pilosebaceous units, but usually affects only the acrotrichium or infundibulum, and largely spares the outer root sheath. Bowen's disease may extend into pilosebaceous structures and, unlike actinic keratosis, may appear completely to replace the infundibulum. In addition, Bowen's disease may have a pagetoid appearance, but does not exhibit a dominant lobular pattern of growth, trichilemmal keratinization, or outer root sheath involvement below the follicular infundibulum. 6 The recommended treatment for trichilemmal carcinoma is complete but conservative surgical excision due to the locally aggressive growth, but recurrence or metastasis is not observed.

Paecilomyces marquandii cellulitis in a kidney transplant patient

Sir, Paecilomyces species are ubiquitous saprophytic fungi that rarely cause human infection. There have been several reports of cutaneous infection from Paecilomyces spp., particularly P. lilacinus. We report a renal transplant patient with P. marquandii cellulitis.

A 50-year-old white man, who had undergone renal transplantation 15 years previously due to chronic glomerulonephritis, was seen 20 days after the appearance of a slowly spreading erythematous area on the anterior aspect of his left leg. There was no history of apparent trauma, but he occasionally worked outdoors in his garden. He had been treated for venous thrombosis of the right leg several years previously. Since undergoing renal transplantation, he had been taking azathioprine and prednisone. There was no history of treatment with steroid infusions or OKT3 following transplantation. Examination revealed a 5 Â 3 cm erythematous indurated plaque, rich red in colour, surmounted by a few haemorrhagic blisters (Fig. 1). No inguinal lymph nodes were palpable. The patient was afebrile but complained of moderate leg pain. The results of laboratory analyses including haematocrit, white cell count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, liver and renal function were normal.

Skin biopsies were taken for histopathological examination and microbiological culture. On staining with haematoxylin and eosin, focal areas of necrosis surrounded by a granulomatous infiltrate containing lymphocytes, histiocytes, neutrophils and plasma cells were identified. Many hyaline hyphae were found in the areas of necrosis. All the essential characters of P. marquandii (Massee) Hughes were identified Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjd/article/143/3/671/6691621 by University Of Illinois Library user on 10 March 2023 on microbiological culture. This strain is preserved at the Microbiology Institute of the Bergamo General Hospital. The patient was treated with oral itraconazole 400 mg daily for 3 weeks; the plaque decreased in size and eventually cleared. He was followed up in our clinic, and no evidence of recurrent fungal infection was noted over a 4-month period.

Paecilomyces is a filamentous fungus genus referring to an asexual state which includes several species: P. crustaceus, P. fumosoroseus, P. javanicus, P. lilacinus, P. marquandii, P. variotii and P. viridis. The habitat of all species of this genus is principally soil, but also dry pasture and decomposing vegetable matter. They are also a common air contaminant and are resistant to most sterilizing techniques. Paecilomyces spp. are rarely associated with human diseases. Different species have been reported to cause endophthalmitis after intraocular lens implantation, orbital cellulitis, prosthetic valve endocarditis, pulmonary infection and postsurgical chronic sinusitis. Only a few cases of cutaneous infections caused by Paecilomyces are described in the literature 1±19 (Table 1), mostly in immunocompromised patients.

To the best of our knowledge, only one previous case of cutaneous infection caused by P. marquandii has been reported: in a kidney transplant patient who developed deep cutaneous cellulitis. 16 Miconazole therapy (10 mg/kg every 8 h) was successful. However, there have been several reported cases of cutaneous infection by P. lilacinus in kidney transplant patients. Suppression of the cell-mediated immune system is probably a predisposing factor to infections with Paecilomyces species. We cannot exclude gardening as an additional risk factor in our patient.

The susceptibility of Paecilomyces spp. to antifungal drugs varies widely among the species. When a patient with infection caused by Paecilomyces spp. is encountered, precise fungal identification and in vitro susceptibility testing are desirable. When immediate antifungal therapy is required,  

Multicentric reticulohistiocytosis associated with Sjo È gren's syndrome

Sir, Multicentric reticulohistiocytosis (MR) is a rare, systemic, reactive histiocytic disease of unknown aetiology. Autoimmune diseases have previously been reported in association with MR, but whether this is a true association or mere coincidence is not known. We report a 57-year-old woman with MR associated with Sjo Ègren's syndrome (SS). There are only three previously reported cases of MR in association with SS in the recent literature. 1±3 Our patient presented with a 14-month history of an itchy papulonodular rash affecting the dorsa of the hands, the neck and the helices of both ears. She had a 2-year history of polyarthropathy affecting mainly the knees and the small joints of her hands. She complained of dry eyes and mouth, and felt generally unwell. On examination (Fig. 1), there were multiple brownish-red papules and nodules. At this time the wrist joints were swollen.

Normal laboratory tests included full blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, renal and liver function and complement levels. The antinuclear antibody titre was 1 : 640 in a discrete speckled pattern, with high positive extractable nuclear antibodies to Ro and La. Her doublestranded DNA was negative, as were her rheumatoid factor, anticardiolipin antibodies, ribonuclear protein, antiscl 70 and anti-Jo1. Her serum triglyceride level was mildly elevated. Plain X-rays of the joints were normal. Mammogram and pelvic ultrasound scan were normal. Schirmer's test was positive bilaterally and rose Bengal staining confirmed keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Skin biopsy from the back of the neck showed epithelioid histiocytes and multinucleated giant cells with characteristic oval-shaped nuclei, prominent nucleoli and abundant eosinophilic ground-glass cytoplasm. S100 staining was negative. The patient was diagnosed as having MR. Treatment with prednisolone 10 mg once daily and hydroxychloroquine 200 mg twice daily eased the joint and sicca symptoms; the rash faded gradually over 2 years.

MR has also been reported in association with systemic lupus erythematosus and coeliac disease, diabetes mellitus, dermatomyositis, primary biliary cirrhosis and thyroid disorders. These cases, and the therapeutic efficacy of immunomodulating drugs, has led to speculation that MR may be an autoimmune disorder.

The characteristic pathological picture is one of multinucleated giant cells infiltrating the skin, mucous membranes and synovium. The giant cells are numerous and have a characteristic voluminous eosinophilic cytoplasm with a ground-glass appearance. Recent electron microscopic studies have shown inclusions within the giant cells of type IV collagen, suggesting that MR is a proliferative rather than an inflammatory disorder. 4 Postlethwaite et al. 5 suggested that antigen-stimulated T cells produce a factor that causes monocytes to fuse and form multinucleated giant cells. Giant cell formation by lectins, which are potent T-cell activators, was reported by Takahashi et al. in 1997. 3 Up to one-third of patients have an underlying malignancy, with 50% of these newly diagnosed after the presentation of MR. An underlying malignancy is the commonest cause of death in these patients, which has led some authors to describe MR as a paraneoplastic syndrome. 6 The reported underlying malignancies include breast, cervical, colonic, ovarian, bronchial and gastric carcinomas. In 1978, Catterall and White 7 reported that 24% of cases of MR had an associated malignant neoplasm, an incidence similar to that in adult dermatomyositis. Stewart et al. 8 reported a patient with inoperable gastric carcinoma whose MR apparently remitted spontaneously. Hanauer's patient had her cervical carcinoma removed, but her MR continued to progress. 9 The relationship between MR and malignancy is a complex one, and many authors remain sceptical about the association. 8±10 No underlying malignancy was found in our patient, but she will remain under close surveillance.

There is no consensus as to the treatment for MR, but several other authors report benefit from prednisolone 10 mg daily, 1±3 alone or in combination with hydroxychloroquine. 1 Cyclophosphamide 75 mg daily has also been used with variable success. 2±7 Most cases of MR undergo spontaneous remission after several years, but patients are often left with a deforming arthropathy, and occasionally succumb to an underlying malignancy. 

Recurrent self-healing cutaneous mucinosis in an adult

Sir, The mucinoses are a group of conditions characterized by the accumulation of mucin in the skin. 1±2 Self-healing juvenile cutaneous mucinosis occurs in children and is characterized by the following: (i) a young age at onset; (ii) the peculiar distribution of the eruption on the face, neck, scalp, abdomen and thighs; (iii) the presence of deep nodules on the face and in periarticular regions; (iv) lack of associated disorders that might be responsible for mucin storage; and (v) an acute onset followed by spontaneous resolution within a few weeks. 3,4 Until recently, there were only a few reports of self-healing mucinosis in adults. 5±6 We describe such a patient. A 34-year-old Korean woman presented with a 14-month history of recurrent erythematous skin lesions. On examination, several erythematous papules or nodules were noted on both hands, especially the periarticular regions (Fig. 1a). The lesions were slightly tender. They appeared over a period of 2 weeks and cleared within a week without any treatment. The patient was otherwise healthy. She denied any subjective symptoms such as fever or arthritis. The lesions were usually confined to the hands. Routine laboratory investigations and thyroid function tests were normal. Antinuclear antibody and rheumatoid factor were negative. Serum electrophoresis was normal. Histopathological examination of the skin lesions on two occasions showed normal epidermis covering oedematous dermis that was occupied by an amorphous substrate which was stained by alcian blue at pH 2´5 but was negative at pH 0´4 (Fig. 1b,c). There was a perivascular infiltrate of a few inflammatory cells in the dermis. A colloidal iron stain was positive, but periodic acid-Schiff was negative. The lesions always resolved spontaneously.

The pathogenesis of mucinoses remains unknown. Selfhealing juvenile cutaneous mucinosis is considered a reactive or reparative response to some chronic antigenic stimulation, such as inflammation or viral infection, or breakdown products of tumours combined with chemotherapeutic agents. 6±8 We could not find any pathogenetic factors in our patient; there were no systemic symptoms, associated illness or apparent exacerbating factors. Although an association between cutaneous mucinoses and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection has been reported, our patient had no evidence of HIV infection. 9 Our case is unique in that the lesions showed the regularity of periodic development and spontaneous resolution and their distribution was confined to both hands, especially the periarticular areas. Self-healing cutaneous mucinosis may show various clinical manifestations within one spectrum: juvenile or adult type, episodic or recurrent. Our case may be one of the subtypes of recurrent self-healing localized cutaneous mucinosis in an adult.  

K-A.JANG M-H.HAN*

Localized morphoea, xanthomatosis and primary biliary cirrhosis

Sir, Morphoea is a disorder of unknown aetiology in which there is sclerosis of the skin. Various aetiologies have been proposed, but no single factor has been consistently incriminated; most cases may be autoimmune. In support of this hypothesis are the reported associations with other diseases that have an autoimmune background.

A 34-year-old man presented with a 6-month history of extensive xanthomata which particularly affected his hands, causing painful limitation of hand movements. He had a 5-year history of worsening asymptomatic jaundice. He was taking no medications. There was no relevant past medical history, family history or risk factors for chronic liver disease. He was jaundiced and had pigmented areas of skin on his abdomen and back which were consistent with localized pigmented atrophic morphoea (Fig. 1a). These had first been noted over 15 years previously. He had widespread mixed pattern xanthomatosis with xanthelasma and marked diffuse xanthomata on his palms (Fig. 1b). There were extensive plane and papular xanthomata in his axillae, with eruptive xanthomata affecting his buttocks. Nodular xanthomata were visible on his elbows and dorsum of the feet. Examination otherwise revealed only mild hepatomegaly.

Full blood count and prothrombin time were normal. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 88 mm in the first hour. Liver function tests showed bilirubin 153 mmol L 21 (normal 0±17), aspartate aminotransferase 257 IU L 21 (normal 10±42) and alkaline phosphatase 1354 IU L 21 (normal 26± 115). Determination of fasting lipids showed cholesterol 42´9 mmol/L (normal , 5´2) and triglycerides 2´97 mmol/L (normal , 2´0). Antinuclear antibody was positive at a titre of . 1 : 320 and antimitochondrial M2 antibody was positive. Screening for other causes of cirrhosis was negative. Borrelia serology was negative. Biopsy of a pigmented area of skin showed reduction of adnexal structures, loss of the normal collagen pattern, a very mild upper dermal mononuclear inflammatory cell infiltrate and uniform basal layer pigmentation, consistent with morphoea. Liver biopsy showed findings consistent with primary biliary cirrhosis.

He was treated with ursodeoxycholic acid 600 mg in the morning/450 mg at night, cholestyramine 4 g twice daily, atorvastatin 20 mg once daily and a low-fat diet. He has been managed conservatively in view of his otherwise good health and progress with treatment. His liver function tests and cholesterol have improved: bilirubin 118 mmol L 21 , aspartate aminotransferase 215 IU L 21 , alkaline phosphatase 1033 IU L 21 and cholesterol 23´9 mmol/L. There has also been regression of his xanthomata, with improved hand movements. There is no direct evidence that morphoea has an autoimmune aetiology, but there is indirect and circumstantial evidence to support it as a cause. There is an increased incidence of autoimmune disorders and tissue autoantibodies in patients with localized morphoea. The relatives of these patients also have an increased incidence of autoimmune disorders. 1 Various immune abnormalities have been reported, including the presence of antinuclear antibody, rheumatoid factor, antisingle-stranded DNA antibody and antihistone antibody. 2 Morphoea-like skin changes can also be seen in chronic graft-vs.-host disease. 3 Morphoea and systemic sclerosis are regarded as distinct clinical entities, but they can coexist, and have similar histological and electron microscopic findings.

Primary biliary cirrhosis has an unknown aetiology, but evidence supports an autoimmune origin. This includes the presence of disease-specific autoantibodies and T cells, the localization of these cells to the liver, and histological findings of infiltrating activated T and B lymphocytes in the vicinity of bile ducts, expressing major histocompatibility complex class II molecules. Additionally, there is the association with other autoimmune diseases and autoantibodies, and indications of a favourable response to immunosuppressive treatment. 4 Non-specific cutaneous findings associated with primary biliary cirrhosis include excoriations, pigmentation, purpura, spider naevi, palmar erythema and xanthomatosis, which can be widespread. Interestingly, there is evidence to suggest that the associated hyperlipidaemia which is often observed does not place patients at a higher risk of death from atherosclerosis. This is felt to be due to an increase in highdensity lipoproteins, which are protective in the development of atherosclerosis. 5±6 Primary biliary cirrhosis has been reported with a number of cutaneous disorders suspected of having autoimmune aetiologies, including bullous pemphigoid, vitiligo, lichen planus and lichen sclerosus et atrophicus. 7,8 The association with morphoea has rarely been described and this additional report adds support to the hypothesis of an autoimmune origin in most cases of morphoea. 7±8 Unilateral resolution of palmar eczema and hyperhidrosis complicated by Horner's syndrome following ipsilateral endoscopic cervical sympathectomy Sir, Endoscopic cervical sympathectomy is an effective treatment for persistent and severe hyperhidrosis but has possible complications. 1±4 We describe a patient with chronic bilateral palmar hyperhidrosis and eczema, both of which resolved unilaterally after a right cervical sympathectomy.

A 32-year-old right-handed woman presented in 1999 to the dermatology clinic. She had had chronic bilateral hand eczema for over 20 years and bilateral palm and sole hyperhidrosis for 10 years. She had not had eczema of the feet. The hand eczema had been treated previously with various topical corticosteroids and emollients, with variable success. A right cervical sympathectomy had been performed for hyperhidrosis in November 1997, with resolution of symptoms of the right hand. Due to the complication of unilateral Horner's syndrome, sympathectomy to treat the left hand had not been performed. At presentation to our department 2 years later, she had no evidence of either eczema or hyperhidrosis of the right palm. The left hand was wet with lichenified, fissured eczema of the palm and fingers (Fig. 1). She also had rightsided ptosis and meiosis consistent with a right Horner's syndrome. The left hand was being treated with iontophoresis using glycopyrronium bromide. Patch testing was negative.

Our patient had had endoscopic transthoracic sympathectomy, which is a minimally invasive procedure and is well recognized as an effective treatment for palmar and axillary hyperhidrosis. 1±4 The procedure requires the ablation of the sympathetic innervation of the eccrine glands from the second to the fourth thoracic ganglia. However, complications can occur with this procedure, such as the incomplete transection of nerves secondary to variable anatomical branching of the sympathetic chain, hence leading to a 5% risk of recurrence. Other problems include compensatory hyperhidrosis affecting the back and thighs in 20% of patients. Cardiac sympathetic denervation leading to bradycardias can occur. 1 Life-threatening complications are rare, but haemothorax and pneumothorax are not uncommon. Horner's syndrome occurs in up to 40% of patients having cervical sympathectomy by conventional open surgery, and rates between 0 and 8% have been reported for those having endoscopic sympathectomy. This syndrome can be transient, or permanent as in our patient. 1±3 Endoscopic sympathectomy is usually performed bilaterally. The patient's dominant hand is treated first so that maximal benefit is achieved at the earliest stage. However, the non-dominant side is not treated if there are any complications, as in this case. Overall, a unilateral procedure is very rarely performed. In our patient there was no evidence of any compensatory hyperhidrosis or worsening of eczema on the left hand following this procedure.

Interestingly, our patient had resolution of her hyperhidrosis immediately but her hand eczema also resolved within 4 weeks of the endoscopic sympathectomy. Hyperhidrosis has been associated with increased sweat gland activity. However, no definite causal link has been shown with sweating or sweat gland activity. Hyperhidrosis may contribute to the symptoms associated with hand eczema. 5±6 We hypothesize the link to be present in certain groups of patients with hand eczema and hence the resolution in our patient following this procedure. 

References

Management difficulties due to concurrent dermatitis herpetiformis and variegate porphyria Sir, The simultaneous occurrence of porphyria and dermatitis herpetiformis (DH) has rarely been reported, 1 but is of importance as life-threatening acute attacks of porphyria may be precipitated in susceptible individuals by sulphone drugs used to treat DH. We report a subject in whom an acute attack of variegate porphyria (VP) was precipitated by treatment of his DH with dapsone, to emphasize difficulties in management. Failure to diagnose porphyria can lead to great or irreversible harm, not just from neurological sequelae but also from photosensitivity and hepatic sequelae. It is therefore crucial for dermatologists to have a high index of suspicion for porphyria when managing a patient with an iatrogenic acute illness.

A 70-year-old ex-coal miner presented with a 2-year history of generalized pruritus on the buttocks, waist, scalp and ears, and intermittent insomnia. Queries regarding past medical history elicited only that he had had chronic bronchitis. Examination revealed herpetiform lesions with papules, vesicles and excoriations on the buttocks, hips, scapulae and forehead. Examination was otherwise normal. Histopathology of a skin biopsy was consistent with DH, and direct immunofluorescence studies of a specimen from uninvolved skin showed discontinuous IgA in the dermal papillae. Dapsone was commenced at 50 mg daily. Three weeks later this was increased to 100 mg daily as there had been only minimal clinical improvement. Two months later he was admitted as an emergency with general malaise, nausea, dyspnoea at rest, neck pains, lack of co-ordination and vertigo. The admitting physician made a differential diagnosis of vertebrobasilar or brain stem infarction. Computed tomography of the brain was normal. Closer questioning revealed a family history of VP. An acute attack of VP was suspected and dapsone was discontinued, followed by an unremarkable recovery. Testing (during a quiescent phase) revealed urinary porphobilinogen (PBG) 3´5 mmol L 21 (normal , 10´7) and urinary total porphyrins 247 nmol L 21 (normal 20±320). Fluorescence emission spectroscopy on plasma showed a prominent porphyrin peak at 626 nm, confirming VP. Full blood count, urea and electrolytes, liver function tests, B 12 , folate and urinalysis were normal or negative. To keep his DH under control, dapsone was cautiously re-introduced at a lower dose of 50 mg daily. However, this precipitated general malaise with nausea, vomiting and dizziness, and dapsone was discontinued with prompt improvement in his symptoms. An endoscopic duodenal biopsy showed changes consistent with coeliac disease. A gluten-free diet was instituted, but his DH relapsed with itchy blisters on the forearms. A significant but incomplete improvement with a gluten-free diet permitted re-introduction of intermittent dapsone at a low dose of 50 mg once or twice a week without any serious side-effects. The porphyrias are a mainly genetically determined group of disorders of metabolism with specific enzyme defects in the haem biosynthetic pathway. VP is classified as one of the acute porphyrias. Patients with VP may manifest either acute or cutaneous clinical features, or both. VP results from the decreased activity of protoporphyrinogen oxidase. This enzyme defect is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, 2 with the genetic locus residing on chromosome 1 (1q21-q23). The enzyme activity approximates to 50% of normal 3 but clinical penetrance is low. Thus, more than 80% of those who inherit the enzyme defect never develop symptoms. 4 Several factors may induce an acute attack in patients with porphyria, of which the most important is drug intake. Problematic drugs include oral contraceptives, barbiturates, sulphonamides, antidepressants and some widely used anticonvulsants. 5 In our asymptomatic subject, VP was unmasked when his DH was treated with dapsone.

DH is an extremely pruritic, symmetrical, vesicobullous dermatosis that can drive patients to suicide. Ninety-five per cent of patients with DH show villous atrophy of the enteric tract. 6 Spontaneous resolution occurs in 10%. 7 The preferred mode of treatment is with a gluten-free diet. However, this can take up to 2 years to become fully effective 8 and thus some form of drug treatment is necessary. Recommended treatments are dapsone, sulphamethoxypyridazine or sulphapyridine, which can control the itch within 48 h. 8 Dapsone is the drug of choice except in those aged over 50 years, where sulphamethoxypyridazine is favoured. 8 However, sulphone drugs should be regarded as unsafe in the acute porphyrias, capable of precipitating an acute attack. 5 Therefore, management can pose significant difficulties. Fortunately, the risk that any drug will provoke an acute attack of porphyria varies widely among between patients, and adherence to a strict gluten-free diet can reduce the amount of drug needed to control the symptoms of DH. 9 Treatment therefore becomes a balancing act with a small dose of dapsone given to control the symptoms of DH, side-effects permitting. For example, our patient adhered to a gluten-free diet and was able to keep the DH quiescent with 50 mg once or twice a week. Patients should be reminded that in addition to reducing the need for drugs, a gluten-free diet hastens resolution of any enteropathy, produces a sense of well-being and protects against the development of lymphoma. Such education and encouragement may improve compliance rates.

Our patient was initially suspected as having had a neurological event. However, closer questioning elicited a family history of VP, highlighting the value of screening asymptomatic relatives for acute porphyrias and educating them about possible precipitants. 4 The importance of this cannot be overemphasized, as failure to diagnose some of the porphyrias can lead to great or irreversible harm, not just from neurologic sequelae but also from photosensitivity and hepatic sequelae. 10 It could be disputed that dapsone itself may have been responsible for the neuropathy. However, the ability to tolerate a low dose argues against this aetiology. Furthermore, even though urinary PBG was normal, fluorescence emission spectroscopy on plasma showed a porphyrin peak at 626 nm, establishing VP. 11 Thus, although it is important to determine porphyrin and porphyrin precursor levels during an attack for the most complete array of confirmatory data, this is not always necessary.

Concurrence of VP and DH has not been reported hitherto, and this case emphasizes the need for vigilance for acute porphyria in iatrogenic disease. Although little formal evidence exists for a dose-related precipitation of porphyria with sulphone drugs, this example would appear to indicate that this may be so. Thus, the use of sulphones to control symptoms of DH until a gluten-free diet becomes fully established may not be absolutely contraindicated. Examination of the back revealed a flesh-coloured, elastichard, pedunculated, round tumour with smooth and slightly keratotic surface, measuring 12 Â 12 Â 3 cm, on the lower back (Fig. 1a,b). The patient also demonstrated four peasized brownish nodules on her trunk and right leg, which were clinically diagnosed as dermatofibromas. A biopsy specimen of the giant tumour revealed dermatofibroma. However, the possibility of malignancy was considered because of its huge size. Therefore, the tumour was excised with a 2-cm wide and deep margin, including the fascia. During surgery, apparent feeding vessels were found in the pedicle of the tumour. There has been no evidence of recurrence after 25 months of follow-up. The other four nodules were also excised, and histologically confirmed as simple dermatofibromas.

On microscopic examination, the giant tumour showed multinodular cellular proliferation with prominent ectatic vascularity involving the dermis to the subcutis. It was divided into an exophytic part and a pedicle. In the exophytic part, the tumour cells compactly occupied the papillary dermis down to the deep dermis without a storiform arrangement. Larger vessels with a muscle coat were found through the tumour.

Haemorrhages and haemosiderin-laden macrophages were found in the upper part of the tumour. The overlying epidermis showed hyperplasia or ulceration in some places. A clear zone was not obvious. In the pedicle, tumour cells were detected from the subcutis to the fascia without a honeycomb pattern. Characteristically, prominent ectatic vascularity presenting a crow's foot or chicken wire appearance was noticed through the tumour (Fig. 2). Most vessels were somewhat thick-walled, ovoid capillaries with variably dilated lumina. The presence of epithelioid cells in close proximity to prominent capillaries imparted a haemangiopericytoma-like appearance. However, unlike the arrangement in haemangiopericytoma, the vascular endothelium was separated from the epithelioid cells by a well-defined rim of connective tissue.  In most lesions, the tumour cells were tightly clustered. A large number of them were large epithelioid cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm (Fig. 3a). Nuclei were eccentrically placed, with vesicular chromatin and small nucleoli. There was no nuclear atypia and no mitotic figures. Furthermore, intermingled with the epitheloid cells were a moderate number of xanthoma cells with a single or grouped arrangement. A greater number of foam cells were detected in the deeper lesion. At the peripheral leading edge of the lesion, the fascicular pattern of prominent spindle cells, probably myofibroblasts, was striking (Fig. 3b).

Twenty to 30% of the tumour cells expressed weak-tomoderate reactivites for factor XIIIa in the peripheral lesion and for histiocytic markers such as CD68 and HLA-DR especially in the deep lesion. However, they did not react with S-100-protein, CD34, CD31, a smooth muscle actin and desmin. Areas of prominent vascularity demonstrated positivity for CD34, CD31 and a smooth muscle actin. Xanthoma cells showed marked reactivity for CD68.

Based on these findings, we made a diagnosis of a giant combined dermatofibroma showing combined features of haemangiopericytoma-like, epithelioid benign fibrous histiocytoma with xanthomatous aggregates, and probable myofibroblastic differentiation.

The features of giant dermatofibroma include: (1) diameter $ 5 cm; (2) a pedunculated appearance; (3) a benign behaviour despite the large size; and (4) the same histopathological characteristics as conventional dermatofibroma. 1 Three new cases including ours have been reported 2±3 and there have probably been about 15 cases.

The peculiarities of our case included the deep penetration of the tumour cells and the combined histological features, differing from those of conventional dermatofibroma. Clinically, this case was the largest among the previous reported cases of giant dermatofibroma. 1±3 Many histological variants of dermatofibroma have been described. Prominent ectatic vascularity has been reported in haemangiopericytoma-like and epithelioid benign fibrous histiocytomas. 4±6 It is well known that dermatofibroma has almost no propensity to recur. However, some variants show potential for local recurrence. 6±7 The shared finding of recurrent variants is prominent vascularity, which was also found in our case. The increased vascularity and haemorrhage in the lesion, to a certain extent, could be related to possible trauma. However, this vascularity may play an important role in progression of this tumour to such a large size, similar to the vascular ectatic mechanism which has been shown in the pathogenesis of verruciform xanthoma. 8 T.NUMAJIRI S.KISHIMOTO R.SHIBAGAKI N.KURAMOTO H.TAKENAKA H.YASUNO Grover's disease, despite histological similarity to Darier's disease, does not share an abnormality in the ATP2A2 gene

Sir, Grover's disease (GD), first described in 1970,1 is a pruritic, papulovesicular eruption which typically occurs in patients who have experienced chronic sun damage. 2 It is characterized histologically by variable focal acantholytic dyskeratosis. There is a persistent form that has such similar morphology and histology to Darier's disease (DD) 3 that some authors have suggested that it is a `forme fruste' of DD. 4 DD is an autosomal dominant skin disorder in which loss of adhesion between epidermal cells (acantholysis) and abnormal keratinization lead to warty papules and plaques on the trunk, flexures and scalp, as well as palmoplantar pits and nail abnormalities. Recent genetic studies have shown that mutations in the ATP2A2 gene (which encodes the sarco/ endoplasmic reticulum Ca 21 -ATPase type 2 isoform or `SERCA2') cause DD, and disclose a role for this pump in a Ca 21 signalling pathway regulating cell-to-cell adhesion and differentiation of the epidermis. 5 To investigate a possible implication of ATP2A2 in GD, we searched for a mutation in this gene in four patients with typical persistent GD, in whom histological changes were similar to those in DD. Conformation-sensitive gel electrophoresis (heteroduplex analysis) and sequencing of the whole gene was performed on DNA extracted from lesional and nonlesional skin, and from leucocytes in all patients. Indirect immunofluorescence was performed to check that there was no antibody to SERCA2.

The results showed no structural abnormality in the gene either in skin (lesional and normal) or in leucocytes. Immunofluorescence was also negative. However, our results do not exclude an ultraviolet-induced functional abnormality in the gene. In conclusion, although there are striking clinical and histopathological similarities seen in these two disorders, the mechanism underlying acantholytic dyskeratosis in GD remains unclear. 

References

Intranasal buserelin acetate-induced pigmented roseola-like eruption Sir, The efficacy of gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonist (GnRHa) for endometriosis, central precocious puberty, uterine fibroids and cancer of the prostate has been established. 1±3 Buserelin acetate, a GnRHa, is widely used in Europe and Asia, and is usually administered nasally to inhibit the ovarian cycle. We report a woman with disseminated roseola-like erythema followed by spotted pigmentation which developed during buserelin therapy.

A 48-year-old woman had suffered from fibroids for a year. Nasal buserelin acetate spray (900 mg daily) was prescribed by a gynaecologist. Three weeks after initiation of buserelin, she noticed a pruritic eruption and an increase in the number of `black moles'. Although discontinuation of buserelin appeared to stop the cutaneous lesions, buserelin therapy was started again. Within 2 weeks after re-administration of buserelin, erythematous eruptions developed again on the trunk. Buserelin therapy was immediately stopped and she was referred to our clinic.

Roseola-like erythematous macules and spotted dark brown regions of pigmentation, all 0´5±1´0 cm in diameter, were seen on the trunk and extremities (Fig. 1). They were not follicle-centred. Skin biopsy demonstrated a slight perivascular lymphocytic infiltrate and an increase in melanin in the basal layer. Patch testing (immediate, 48 and 72 h) and scratch-patch testing (immediate and 30 min) for buserelin were negative. Laboratory findings including eosinophil count and endocrine data were within the normal range. Syphilis serology was negative. Discontinuation of buserelin completely stopped the development of erythematous macules. Two weeks after discontinuation, the erythematous macules changed to spotted pigmentation. Although the regions of pigmentation cleared gradually, some of them persisted for 2 years after the onset of skin symptoms.

Buserelin treatment induces headache and nausea, and symptoms resembling those of the menopause. To our knowledge, the cutaneous adverse effect of buserelin presented here has never been previously reported. The manufacturer of buserelin (Aventis Pharma, Japan) was not aware of any reports of this type of cutaneous adverse effect. Although buserelin is widely used in veterinary practice (animal breeding), roseola-like eruptions and spotted pigmentation have never been reported. The precise mechanism of development of cutaneous lesions is unclear. An allergic reaction could not be confirmed because no eosinophil infiltration was found histopathologically, and patch and scratch-patch tests were negative. A close relationship between skin pigmentation and sex hormone administration has been previously reported. 4 Sex hormone modulation caused by buserelin might be responsible for the cutaneous lesions. Given the age of the women treated with GnRHa and the widespread use of GnRHa in, for example, in vitro fertilization, 3 the cutaneous side-effect of buserelin described here should be noted. 

A case of chronic granulomatous skin disease associated with deficient HLA class I expression

Sir, Some 100 cases have been reported world-wide of congenital deficiency of HLA class I expression, the so-called Type I Bare Lymphocyte Syndrome (BLS I). 1±2 Clinically, this syndrome is characterized by abnormal susceptibility to bacterial infections. Here we present a case associated with a non-infectious chronic skin disorder, which has, to our knowledge, not previously been described.

A woman of Flemish origin suffered since childhood from frequent purulent rhinitis, sinusitis and otitis which responded to antibiotic treatment. From the age of 12 years, she had chronic bronchitis, and when she was 18-year-old, bilateral bronchiectasis was diagnosed. At the age of 34 years, papules with secondary ulceration appeared on both legs and on the midface, and progressive destruction of the outer nose ensued. Skin biopsies showed severe necrotizing granulomatous inflammation in the dermis and hypodermis and small vessel vasculitis. Staining and culture of skin biopsies failed to demonstrate mycobacteria, fungi or leishmania. Culture on cell lines supporting growth of herpes viridae remained negative. Natural killer cell lymphoma was excluded by immunohistochemistry of the infiltrate, showing scarce CD56 1 CD3± lymphocytes. The appropriate examinations ruled out systemic lupus erythematosus and Wegener's granulomatosis. Several therapeutic trials were performed, including antituberculous therapy, corticosteroids and other immunosuppressive agents, but all without success.

HLA serotyping failed to detect class I antigens on the peripheral blood mononuclear cells isolated on immunomagnetic beads (Dynal, Oslo, Norway). Her HLA class II phenotype was HLA-DR13(6); DQ6(1); DR52. DNA typing by PCR with sequence-specific oligonucleotide probes (Innogenetics, Zwijnaarde, Belgium) yielded HLA-A*03; B*1501; C*03 and HLA-DRB1*1301; DRB3*0202; DQB1*0603. The patient's parents were both deceased, so the apparent HLA homozygosity of the patient could not be confirmed. The patient's three children, all in perfect health, were HLA typed; we found normal inheritance of the maternal haplotype, with normal expression of HLA class I and class II antigens.

Presence of class I genes without the corresponding antigens clearly constitutes lack of HLA class I expression. The results of HLA genotyping suggest MHC homozygosity, which is supported by consanguinity of the patient's parents. The case is therefore compatible with an MHC-linked autosomal recessive disorder. Indeed, mutations of the TAP peptide transporter genes have been shown in HLA class I deficiency. 3±5 The patient's recurrent bacterial infections of the respiratory tract, with an early onset, are typical features of BLS I. 6±7 As HLA class I molecules have the physiological role to present cytoplasma-derived antigenic peptides to cytotoxic CD8 1 T-cells, 8 the absence of overwhelming viral infections in BLS I patients is remarkable. The lack of an antigen-specific immune response to these agents might be compensated for by the activity of NK cells. Indeed, while the CD81 T-cells were decreased to only 3%, the NK cells still made up 7% of the blood lymphocytes, which is in the low normal range.

The granulomatous skin disorder, resembling an autoimmune-mediated disease, with which the patient presented in adult life, has not been described in other cases of deficient HLA class I expression. Although a variety of Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjd/article/143/3/671/6691621 by University Of Illinois Library user on 10 March 2023 clinical manifestations have been observed in patients with BLS, including aplastic anaemia, 9 dermatological symptoms have not been reported.

Although further research is needed into the physiopathology of the skin disease, we suggest that serological and molecular HLA typing should be systematically performed in patients with unexplained granulomatous skin disorders. Human herpesvirus type 8-positive facial angiosarcoma developing at the site of botulinum toxin injection for blepharospasm Sir, Angiosarcoma is a rare, aggressive, malignant tumour of vascular origin that affects mostly the elderly, has a predilection for skin and soft tissues, and commonly involves the head, neck, scalp, face and eyelids. Although there are a few reports on human herpesvirus type 8 (HHV8)-positive angiosarcomas, 1 other workers could not detect the oncogenic virus in the tumour. 2 We report facial angiosarcoma in a 66-year-old man, who had had essential blepharospasm since 1964 and insulindependent diabetes mellitus since 1983. The spasm of the orbicularis oculi muscles had been treated every 3 months for 4 years by botulinum toxin A injected at the lateral parts of the lower and upper lid (Botox, Alcon, 20 U on each occasion). The patient tolerated the treatment well; however, the last infiltration was not `successful'. He developed periorbital erythema and oedema at the site of the injection; antibiotic and antihistamine treatment was initiated by his family doctor without benefit. When first seen, a non-pitting, livid oedema was present on the face, with right-sided predominance. The right eye was closed by blepharospasm and oedema, and the left eye could hardly be opened (Fig. 1a). As a consequence of blepharospasm he had had visual difficulties which had progressed rapidly over the previous months because of increasing eyelid oedema. The following diagnostic possibilities were considered: a toxic, botulinum toxin-induced chronic inflammation, superior vena cava syndrome, neoplasm-associated secondary lymphatic oedema, and facial angiosarcoma.

Except for a moderately increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (23±53±14 mm h 21 ), eosinophilia at 1´5 Â 10 9 L 21 (normal 0´2±0´7 Â 10 9 L 21 ) and hyperglycaemia, no abnormalities were found. Thyroid-stimulating hormone, and T3 and T4, were within the normal range. Antinuclear antibodies, Sm and RNP antibodies were negative. A colour duplex study of the neck veins, and X-ray and magnetic resonance imaging of the skull showed no abnormalities. A computed tomographic scan of the neck revealed enlarged lymph glands. X-ray of the chest showed no signs of metastasis.

Skin biopsies were taken at two different times from the forehead and glabella. Both revealed lymphocytic infiltration of the dermis and subcutis, as well as dilated or narrow, irregular blood vessels and a `reactive hyperplasia' of the lymphatic vessels. Direct immunofluorescence showed a vasculitis of C3 type.

DNA was prepared from frozen skin biopsy samples and from peripheral blood mononuclear cells. The presence of HHV8 DNA was confirmed by polymerase chain reaction using primer pairs amplifying a 233-bp DNA fragment of KS330 localized from base pairs 987±1219 of the KS330 Bam fragment. 3 HHV8-specific sequences were detected in the facial tissue, but not in the peripheral lymphocytes (Fig. 1b).

On the basis of the first and second histology results showing `reactive lymphatic hyperplasia', radiotherapy was initiated in order to decrease the infiltration of the connective tissue. Because of the C3 vasculitis, dapsone was also administered. The X-irradiation resulted in a transitory improvement, but was followed by quick progression: the oedema extended to the neck, and the infiltration increased.

Based on the presence of HHV8 DNA, interferon alfa-2a therapy was also introduced 4 (Roferon, Roche, 4 Â 9 mU weekly for 6 weeks), without any significant effect. The continuous progression of skin symptoms strongly suggested the possibility of angiosarcoma. Review of the histological specimens confirmed the diagnosis of a well-differentiated angiosarcoma (Fig. 1c). The patient received full doses of radiotherapy. After temporary improvement the tumour progression was no longer inhibited. He refused any further treatment.

The initial symptoms of angiosarcoma often resemble chronic, livid, non-pitting oedema or erysipelas. Later, a slowly increasing, nodular infiltration or necrosis and lymphorrhoea indicate malignancy. The tumour has a very poor prognosis with rapid local progression accompanied by haematogenous metastases mostly to the lungs. Radical surgical excision is rarely successful on the face. Angiosarcomas can be temporarily sensitive to radiation, but relapses resistant to irradiation are common. The results of polychemotherapy are questionable.

The association of pre-existing long-lasting blepharospasm and frequent local botulinum toxin infiltration therapy with subsequent development of angiosarcoma at the site is novel. Botulinum toxin injections might have had specific or nonspecific effects in initiation of the tumour. Development of angiosarcoma at the site of chronic irritation and inflammation (non-functioning arteriovenous fistula, surgical breast conservation therapy, chronic lymphoedema) or immunosuppression due to irradiation has been observed. 5±7 As in our patient, HHV8 DNA has been found in some other cases of angiosarcoma. 1 HHV8, an oncogenic virus, is not specific for Kaposi's sarcoma, but can be detected in other haemangioproliferative disorders. Botulinum toxin infiltration seems to be a safe and effective therapy of blepharospasm with rare, and mostly reversible side-effects, such as ptosis, tearing, lagophthalmos, facial numbness, diplopia and ectropion. 8 In our patient, botulinum toxin infiltration might have acted as a triggering factor in the initiation of HHV8-induced angiosarcoma. 

S.KA

Adaptive antioxidant defence in human dermal fibroblasts

Sir, Infiltration of dermal connective tissue by activated polymorphonuclear leucocytes (PMN) is a typical feature in a variety of inflammatory conditions, including psoriasis vulgaris, Sweet's syndrome, cellulitis and early phases of tissue repair. Even though, when activated, PMN have the capacity to release high amounts of toxic reactive oxygen species (ROS), with superoxide anions being the most prominent, 1 comparatively little damage to fibroblasts and structural proteins of the extracellular matrix can be detected histologically. Therefore, we questioned whether an adaptive inducible antioxidant defence mechanism exists in fibroblasts, which may confer protection from PMN-derived oxidative damage. As manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) represents the first line of defence against oxidative attack by its detoxifying activity on superoxide anions, we studied the effect of increased ROS release from activated PMN on the overall activity of MnSOD in human dermal fibroblasts. For this purpose, PMN were isolated from heparinized venous blood of healthy human volunteers, 2 activated with the bacterial tripeptide N-formyl methionyl leucyl phenylalanine (FMLP), and superoxide anion release was quantified using a spectrophotometric method based on the reduction of cytochrome c. 3 In a subsequent set of experiments, human dermal fibroblasts established by outgrowth from foreskin biopsies of healthy donors aged between 3 and 6 years were cocultured with FMLP-activated PMN at a ratio of 1 : 10 or with otherwise identically isolated PMN which had not been activated with FMLP (control). After co-culture for 5 min (designated as time point 0), 1, 3 or 12 h, PMN were removed by gently rinsing the fibroblast monolayer with phosphatebuffered saline. Fibroblast monolayer cultures were subsequently homogenized and MnSOD activity was determined using the modified nitroblue tetrazolium reduction method according to Buettner et al. 4 Whereas control PMN did not show any release of superoxide anions, a marked increase in the release of superoxide anions from PMN was observed upon FMLP stimulation (Fig. 1a). Interestingly, a maximal two-fold increase in MnSOD activity was observed 1 h after initiating co-culture with activated PMN, compared with controls (Fig. 1b). A possible contribution of initial co-culture time of 5 min in the time point 0 cultures can almost be excluded, as absolute MnSOD activity levels were identical in fibroblast monolayer cultures from the same donor compared with MnSOD activity in fibroblasts cocultured for 5 min with untreated or FLMP-activated PMN (data not shown). Whereas MnSOD activity remained increased at 3 h, it returned to almost basal levels at 12 h after initiation of the co-culture with activated PMN (Fig. 1b). By contrast, MnSOD As indicated, the P-values of FMLPstimulated cocultures at 1 h and at 3 h relate to significant differences from baseline time 0 (VP , 0´0001, anova). There is a slight induction of MnSOD activity in unstimulated cocultures at 1 h and at 3 h compared with baseline time 0 ( §P 0´0026, anova). Induction in FMLP-stimulated co-cultures compared with unstimulated co-cultures is highly significant at 1 h (*P 0´0001, Student's t-test) and at 3 h (#P 0´0001, Student's t-test).

activity in fibroblasts increased only marginally in the presence of control PMN. This slight increase reached statistical significance and was possibly due to mechanical activation of PMN during isolation, with subsequent release of low levels of cytokines with MnSOD-stimulating properties.

Our data indicate that activation of PMN, with subsequent enhanced release of ROS, substantially stimulates the enzymatic antioxidant response in human dermal fibroblasts. Even though we provide correlative evidence that enhanced superoxide anion levels are linked to an increase in MnSOD activity, our data do not allow us fully to exclude other ROS released from activated PMN being involved in this process. However, so far, exclusively superoxide anions and no other ROS have been shown to stimulate MnSOD. 5 Regardless of whether superoxide anions or other ROS play a causal role, the observed adaptive antioxidant defence mechanism most probably protects fibroblasts and structural proteins of the extracellular matrix from the damaging effects of ROS in a variety of cutaneous inflammatory conditions. This may be of particular interest as superoxide anions, besides other ROS, induce the synthesis and activity of matrix-degrading metalloproteinases, thus causing substantial degradation of connective tissue. 6 The adaptive antioxidant response of fibroblasts reported here is most probably not exclusively restricted to the skin, but may represent a more universal protection mechanism against PMN or otherwise mediated oxidative attack on connective tissues.

Codeine caused pruritic scarlatiniform exanthemata: patch test negative but positive to oral provocation test Sir, Codeine was first extracted from opium in 1832, and in 1882 its chemical formula was determined to be the methyl ester of morphine. Despite extensive use as an analgesic and antitussive drug, clear-cut cases of codeine-induced exanthemata are rare. 1 To Èro Èk, in a 10-year observation period of `dermatitis medicamentosa', found only 15 of 1303 cases to be elicited by codeine. 2 We report the case of a 58-year-old non-atopic male Caucasian who developed a pruritic rash affecting body and face and periorbital swelling 3 h after the ingestion of codeine 20 mg, acetylcysteine 600 mg and acetylsalicylic acid 500 mg because of influenza. There was no other history of allergic drug reactions.

Previous intake of the medication had been well tolerated. The patient reported to our allergy unit 10 months later. Clinical examination demonstrated an obese patient (body mass index (BMI) 27´1 kg m 22 normal BMI range, 18´5± 24´9 kg m 22 ) with normal appearing skin.

Laboratory test results, including blood count and routine serum analysis were normal. The total serum IgE level as well as the serum specific IgE to numerous allergens, including food and aero-allergens, was not raised (codeine not available). Histamine release test (HRT) and CAST-ELISA with codeine failed to demonstrate release of intracellular mediators in vitro. As expected, due to its histamine liberating effect, skin prick tests (SPT) with codeine were positive after 20 min, negative at 6, 24 and 48 h. SPT using acetylcysteine and acetylsalicylic acid were negative. Patch tests were performed with acetylcysteine (0´1% w/v aqua), acetylsalicylic acid (0´1% w/v aqua) and two dilutions of codeine phosphate and dihydrocodeine hydrogentartrate (0´01% w/v aqua), 0´1% w/v aqua, respectively). Readings taken after 20±60 min, 48 and 72 h revealed negative test results for all examined drugs.

After informed consent was obtained, oral provocation tests (OPT) with intake of acetylcysteine (600 mg) and acetylsalicylic acid (50 mg, 250 mg, 500 mg, 1000 mg) were performed and caused no reactions. OPT over a 2-h time interval with codeine phosphate (1 mg, 4 mg, 8 mg) resulted in pruritic scarlatiniform exanthem (Fig. 1a) for 24 h, urticarial lesions on the upper part of the body, and swelling of the upper extremities and lower lids starting 7 h after the intake of the 8 mg dose. Rechallenge with codeine phosphate 3 days later again led to the pruritic scarlatiniform exanthem, as well as a swelling of the right lateral region of the neck. Lesional skin biopsy revealed a mild intraepidermal spongiosis and a perivascular mononuclear cell infiltrate with eosinophils and mast cells, consistent with a drug eruption (Fig. 1b).

The methods available for identifying the responsible substance in a drug eruption are limited. Often, the patient's history and a thorough review of the suspected drug's Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjd/article/143/3/671/6691621 by University Of Illinois Library user on 10 March 2023 association with cutaneous reactions will provide valuable information. Furthermore, in vivo and in vitro tests to detect the causative agent have been employed for many decades. In this context, it is of interest that codeine acts on skin mast cells but not on basophils, thereby explaining the negative results of the HRT and CAST-ELISA. Although patch testing is the gold standard in allergic contact dermatitis, 1±3 its value in patients with non-eczematous eruptions due to ingestion of codeine remains controversial. 2,4±6 An inconspicuous patch test reading, as in our patient, may theoretically also represent a false-negative result because of improper dilution of codeine, unsuitable selection of the vehicle, as well as insufficient application time, occlusion, fixation and penetration of the allergen. Nevertheless, in patients with negative patch test results, OPT in a hospital setting has been shown to confirm the aetiological agent in 57±75% of all cases. 2,7,8 It is not recommended for patients with a history of toxic epidermal necrolysis, Stevens±Johnson syndrome, or lupus erythematosus. 7 The first in-patient OPT with codeine was performed over 100 years ago by von Essen 9 in St Petersburg, Russia, with a striking similarity to the observed cutaneous reaction in our case.

In conclusion, clinical symptomatology and dermatohistopathology suggested a delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction in our case. Nevertheless, a late-phase reaction after initial immediate-type reaction with direct histamine release has also to be taken into consideration. However, no late-phase reactivity in SPT was encountered. Despite a negative CAST-ELISA, a pseudo-allergic reaction 10 due to codeine cannot be completely ruled out when elucidating the true nature of this T-cell-mediated drug eruption.

M.MO È HRENSCHLAGER

A.GLO 

Partial lipodystrophy with hemithoracic atrophy

Sir, Partial lipodystrophy (PL) is a rare disease of unknown aetiology, characterized by greatly diminished or absent subcutaneous fat over any part of the body surface. 1 The disease may begin in childhood, usually after a febrile illness. 1,2 Women are more frequently affected. 1 We report a patient with PL who had rheumatoid arthritis and hemithoracic atrophy.

A 60-year-old woman who had significant loss of subcutaneous fat on her right upper limb, trunk, and lower limb was seen at the outpatient clinic of the Dermatology Department. The patient reported that she had had measles when she was 13 years old. Thereafter, she developed unilateral loss of subcutaneous fat tissue which had progressed from the scapular area and postero-lateral portion of the right upper limb down the trunk and lower limb, over a period of 30 years. The patient had also noticed a progressive arthralgia and stiffness of her joints 10 years ago. These complaints were especially prominent in the first hours after waking. A diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis had been made by the Rheumatology Department 7 years previously, according to the 1987 American Rheumatism Association criteria, and she had been treated with methotrexate and oral steroid. There was no family history of PL.

On physical examination, unilateral lipoatrophy on the right side of body was apparent, sparing the face. An absence of subcutaneous fat on the outer aspect of the right upper limb was noted (Fig. 1a), and at the distribution of the 8th and 10th/11th thoracic nerves on the trunk. The loss of fat tissue in each area was prominently demarcated from the normal tissue. The superficial veins were patent, and the skin overlying the areas of lipoatrophy was thin and smooth. Ulnar deviation of the hands and equine deformity of the foot were seen, more prominent on the right than the left.

Abnormal laboratory tests were: rheumatoid factor, 86´3 IU mL 21 (normal 0±20 IU mL 21 ); erythrocyte sedimentation rate 32 mm h 21 ; and C-reactive protein 20´5 mg dL 21 (normal 0±6 mg dL 21 ). Normal or negative results were obtained for full blood count, fasting blood glucose, glucose tolerance test, fasting plasma insulin, cholesterol and triglyceride, electrolytes, liver function tests, thyroxine, complement C 3 and C 4 , antinuclear antibody and anti-dsDNA, anti streptolysin titre, and Borrelia antibodies.

A skin biopsy from the right scapular area disclosed normal skin, but the subcutaneous tissue had few mature adipose cells surrounded by irregular fibrovascular tissue strands which were thicker than normal. Thoracic high resolution computed tomography showed that the right upper hemithorax was smaller, and the adipose tissue less, compared with the left upper hemithorax, and there was no adipose tissue in some areas of the right upper anterior thoracic wall (Fig. 1b). Cranial tomography was normal. On abdominal ultrasonography, intra-abdominal organs were within normal limits.

Although the pathogenesis of PL is unknown, its association with disorders such as lupus erythematosus, 2 dermatomyositis, 3 Sjo Ègren's syndrome, coeliac disease, dermatitis herpetiformis, 4 myasthenia gravis, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, Raynaud's phenomenon, scleroderma and Hashimoto's disease, suggest an immunological basis for this disease. 2±4 Immunological disturbances such as circulating antibodies and immune complexes may be strongly involved. 5 Our patient represents the first case of PL coexistent with rheumatoid arthritis. In patients with congenital lipodystrophy, loss of fat may be obvious at birth. 1 Progressive fat atrophy with multisystem abnormalities, including metabolic and endocrine disorders, 6 muscular atrophy, 7 muscular hypertrophy, 8 hypertrichosis of the skin, hypertrophic genitalia, 9 and unilateral enophthalmos, 10 develop later in life. Visceral enlargement, renal failure and lymphadenopathy may be associated with PL. 1,11 Hemithoracic atrophy secondary to acquired PL has not been reported. We are of the opinion that the hemithoracic atrophy may have developed due to muscular atrophy and restricted movement of muscles and joints.

In most cases, fat atrophy occurs on the upper half of the body and spares the lower limbs. PL may rarely progress to the generalized form of the disease. Ten percent of patients with PL may have hemilipodystrophy involving half of the face or body. 1 The facial sparing and prominent focal unilateral loss of fat on the upper limb and trunk differentiate our patient from others reported. Although some authors consider fat atrophy to be a primary abnormality of the fat cells, others believe that it may be explained on a neurological basis. 1 The prominent absence of the fat tissue on the innervation areas of the 8th and 10th/11th thoracic nerves in our patient fits with the concept that neurological factors are important.

There were no signs of active joint inflammation when our patient was seen. The stiffness, decreased range of movement and deformity of the joints (ulnar deviation of the hands and equine deformity of the feet) were all more prominent on the right than the left half of the body. However, it seems most likely that the association of rheumatoid arthritis, a common condition, and lipodystrophy is coincidental. Sir, Recently, lymphoblastic lymphomas of putatively immature or progenitor natural killer (NK)-cell lineage have been reported. 1±4 These lymphomas possess particular characteristic features, including positivity for CD56 and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT), negativity for Epstein±Barr virus (EBV), and no rearrangements of T and B cell immunoassociated genes. 2±4 This report provides a description of a rare case of lymphoblastic lymphoma expressing an NK cell phenotype and with initial expression in the skin.

A 39-year-old Japanese man was referred to our hospital in September 1998, complaining of multiple, indurated, slightly reddish plaques up to the size of a thumb-tip; the plaques were located on his left cheek, forearms and trunk (Fig. 1a). The patient first became aware of a plaque on his left forearm in April 1996. Further lesions developed on his left cheek, right forearm and trunk during March 1998.

A biopsy specimen obtained from the nodule on his back revealed diffuse proliferation of neoplastic cells, which were medium-sized and had irregularly folded delicate nuclear membranes, fine chromatin, and tiny nucleoli (Fig. 1b). Angiocentric features were not seen in the biopsy section. The majority of lymphocytes were positive for TdT and CD56, but negative for CD2, CD3, CD4, CD5, CD8, CD16, CD20, CD25, CD30, CD34, CD45RO, CD57 and myeloperoxidase (MPO). The neoplastic cells were negative for EBV-encoded latent membrane protein-1 by immunohistochemistry, and negative for EBV-encoded small RNAs by in situ hybridization. Immunogenotyping showed germline configurations for the T-cell receptor Cb1 gene and T-cell receptor Jg gene chain constant regions and the immunoglobulin heavy-chain gene in the skin specimen. A PCR assay was performed to detect the EBV genome, and Southern blotting analysis was performed to test for the EBV terminal repeat; both tests were negative in the skin specimen. In addition, transmission electron microscopy revealed a few membrane-bound electron-dense granules measuring 200±500 nm in diameter in the cell cytoplasm.

The laboratory findings included: a white blood cell count of 3´3 Â 10 9 L 21 that included 51´0% lymphocytes and 1´0% atypical lymphocytes; a red blood-cell count of 4´59 Â 10 12 L 21 ; a platelet count of 202 Â 10 9 L 21 ; and an immunoglobulin value of 15 g L 21 with IgG 11 g L 21 , IgM 1´2 g L 21 and IgA 2´2 g L 21 . A 67 Ga citrate scintigram showed marked accumulation in the oral cavity, upper pharynx, mediastinum and pulmonary hilum. The chest and neck computed tomography (CT) scan identified enlarged mediastinal, bronchopulmonary, left submandibular, submental and deep cervical lymph nodes. The biopsy specimen obtained from the epipharynx revealed diffuse proliferation of lymphoblastic cells similar to that observed in the skin. In the biopsy specimen obtained from the bone marrow, there were a few cells with NK markers (CD16, 5´8%; CD56, 8´8%) and no atypical lymphoid cells. There were no notable findings on brain or abdominal CT scan. The remainder of the work-up, including urinalysis, antinuclear antibody, and serum tests for syphilis, HIV-1 and HTLV-1 provided normal or negative results.

The patient was given combined chemotherapy consisting of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin hydrochloride, vincristine and prednisolone. Partial remission occurred after the third cycle of treatment, but did not improve with additional courses. After the twelfth cycle of treatment, reddish plaques recurred on the patient's head and trunk. Three cycles of combined chemotherapy consisting of ifosfamide, cytarabin and methotrexate were then administered, resulting in complete remission.

Recently, an increasing number of cases of lymphoblastic lymphoma of putatively immature or progenitor NK-cell lineage have been reported. 2±4 Lanier et al. 5 pointed out that most fetal-type NK cells express cytoplasmic CD31g and CD3 1d complexes and the z chain, but there were no rearranged T cell receptors. Lanier et al. 5 also described the phenotypes of NK/T bipotential thymocyte progenitors such as cCD31, CD51, CD341, CD561, and those of the immature NK cell as cCD3^, CD5±, CD34±, CD56^. 6 Kawano et al. 7 reported a case of lymphoblastic lymphoma with an immature stage of NK lineage expressing CD31 and CD3z mRNA and TdT by RNA blot analysis. However, negativity for cCD3 and TdT was demonstrated by immunofluorescence. In the present case, lymphoma cells within the sampled cutaneous nodule were immunophenotypically positive for TdT and CD56; these cells had azurophilic granules in their cytoplasm and were negative for CD2, cCD3, CD4, CD5, CD34, MPO and EBV, and had no rearrangements of the T-and B-cell immunoassociated genes. We therefore assume that this CD56positive cutaneous lymphoma may have originated from an immature or progenitor NK-cell lineage.  Severe disabling Ko È ebnerizing ulcerated necrobiosis lipoidica successfully managed with topical PUVA Sir, We describe a severely disabled diabetic patient with Ku È bnerizing ulcerated necrobiosis lipoidica (NL), responding to treatment with topical PUVA. A 72-year-old male was referred to the dermatology clinic with disabling ulceration of his feet. Three years previously he had developed erythematous plaques affecting both feet, similar in appearance to a plaque on his right knee that had remained unchanged for 20 years. Within a year of onset the plaques gradually enlarged and ulcerated. Ulceration was associated with recurrent infections, deterioration in glycaemic control and disabling pain. The discomfort was so severe that he could no longer walk; he became housebound and unable to continue his favourite hobby of ballroom dancing. The patient even raised the possibility of having an amputation. In the year prior to seeing a dermatologist he required three hospital admissions; on each occasion he was treated with surgical debridement, intravenous antibiotics and insulin. Numerous courses of oral antibiotics were administered as an outpatient. Our patient has had diabetes for 5 years and prior to the onset of these ulcerated lesions, had required oral hypoglycaemics only. He has no other complications of diabetes.

Examination revealed several well-demarcated smooth shiny erythematous plaques with central atrophy and superficial ulceration on both feet and the right knee. The plaques on the feet were at sites where his shoes would rub. There was no neuropathy and no radiological evidence of osteomyelitis. Histology showed palisading granuloma in the mid-dermis characterized by a central amorphous acellular area surrounded by lymphocytes, epithelioid histiocytes and numerous giant multinucleated cells, confirming the clinical diagnosis of NL.

In view of the limited and potentially harmful therapeutic options available for the treatment of NL, we decided to treat the lesions with topical PUVA. The patient was treated twice weekly. Each treatment involved the application of 4´2 mL cm 22 8-methoxypsoralen gel to the plaques 15 min before exposure to UVA. The initial dose of UVA was 0´25 J cm 22 and this was increased by regular increments of 0´1±0´25 J cm 22 . After only three treatments there was a marked reduction in pain; all analgesics were stopped and he was able to walk comfortably. Further treatments led to healing of the ulceration and return to normal skin texture (Fig. 1). Over a period of one year the patient received 47 treatments with a cumulative UVA dose of 171´75 J cm 22 . The plaques receded from an area of 2122112 cm 2 , a total reduction of 47%. Two plaques completely cleared. Our patient was once more able to dance and the improvement has continued a year after therapy was stopped.

The isomorphic (Ko Èebner) response describes the development of a lesion in previously normal skin that has been traumatized. Although initially described in psoriasis by Ko Èebner, a number of dermatoses display the phenomenon, including NL. 1 It is thought that the increased production of collagen instigates the response in NL. 2 Despite the clinical impression that this response in NL is not uncommon, a Granuloma pyogenicum arising in an arteriovenous haemangioma associated with a port-wine stain Sir, Granuloma pyogenicum (GP) has been reported to be associated with haemangiomas and hamartomas, including port-wine stain (PWS). 1 Some cases of PWS have been reported with arteriovenous malformation consisting of thickened vascular walls and intervascular stroma. 2 It has been suggested that the spontaneous development of GP in PWS might be associated with microscopic arteriovenous anastomoses in highly vascularized areas such as the fingers, hands, lips, tongue and face. 2,3 We report a 16-year-old boy with GP arising from an arteriovenous haemangioma associated with PWS, and discuss the relationship between GP and arteriovenous malformation associated with PWS.

A 16-year-old boy presented with a solitary papule on the right eyebrow for 4 months. When he had first noted the match-head sized papule, he had tried to squeeze and remove the lesion as he presumed it to be an acne lesion. Examination revealed a solitary 8 Â 8 mm strawberry-like dome-shaped papule within a well-demarcated reddish coloured surrounding patch which had been present on the right eyelid from birth (Fig. 1). The lesion was determined to be a GP arising in a PWS, and was excised. Histopathological findings revealed a mass of capillaries with variable luminal diameters, and immature endothelial proliferation in the upper dermis. The capillaries were organized into lobules separated by fibrous stroma, and were surrounded by an epithelial collarette. The lower dermis underlying the lesion was composed of densely aggregated, thick-walled and thin-walled vessels lined by a single layer of endothelial cells within a circumscribed area, which was assumed to be an arteriovenous haemangioma. A small number of thin-walled dilated capillaries was present in the adjacent upper dermis, consistent with PWS.

Immunohistochemical staining with factor VIII-related antigen was positive in the endothelial cells of all vessels in the upper and lower dermis. In addition, immunohistochemical staining with actin and collagen type IV antigen was positive in the walls of blood vessels in the lower dermis, indicating that most of these blood vessels had smooth muscle fibres in their walls. Weighert elastic fibre staining was negative in the walls of blood vessels, indicating that most of the blood vessels were veins. During a follow-up period of 12 months, the papule within the PWS has never recurred, but the PWS persisted unchanged on the right periorbital area.

GP is regarded as a reactive rather than a neoplasic tumour. 4 It often arises at sites of minor trauma 5,6 and can occur following a variety of traumatic manipulations such as smallpox vaccination, 7 hair transplantation 8 and laser treatment. 9±12 However, trauma alone is not the sole cause of all cases of GP. Hormonal factors may have a role, as it is a common occurrence in pregnant women and those taking oral contraceptives. 13 In addition, the lesions can appear within an existing PWS, 1 but there is commonly no prior history of dermatological conditions. 5 Rusin and Harrell 3 noted that GP had a predilection for the fingers, hands, lips and tongue secondary to trauma, and it is not difficult to perceive the creation of minute, abnormal arteriovenous communications in these highly vascularized areas resulting from such trauma. They suggested that it might represent a form of acquired arteriovenous fistula. 3 In our case, histopathology revealed numerous newly formed, proliferating capillaries in the upper dermis, and some thick-walled and thin-walled vessels lined by a single layer of endothelial cells were anastomosed in the underlying dermis. These findings would be supported by immunohistochemical staining using several antibodies such as actin and collagen type IV antigen and factor VIII-related antigen. We performed immunohistochemical staining with these antibodies. Actin staining indicated that most blood vessels had walls containing smooth muscle of variable thickness. This stain is a useful tool in recognizing arteriovenous haemangiomas composed of thinwalled and thick-walled blood vessels.

In this case, the pathogenesis of GP in arteriovenous haemangioma, which was associated with PWS, is not certain. To produce a GP, the underlying condition of PWS to induce arteriovenous haemangioma is thought to overlap with an external factor such as trauma. Our patient gave a history of squeezing the lesion to remove it. This case provides some supporting evidence to the existing literature that development of GP in PWS is associated with microscopic arteriovenous anastomoses. 1 The coincidental occurrence of GP and arteriovenous haemangioma in PWS may help us to identify a common underlying mechanism in pathogenesis of the two different conditions. Dermatomyositis with the features of inclusion body myositis associated with carcinoma of the bladder: a true association?

J-

Sir, After carefully reading the article from Talanin et al. 1 a major question comes to us. The case presented seems to be simply an association of classical adult dermatomyositis (DM) with carcinoma (of the bladder in this case). Neither the clinical picture nor histopathology of muscle suggests the presence of an associated inclusion body myositis (IBM). IBM represents a well-differentiated entity among inflammatory myopathies, with proposed diagnostic criteria. 2 Talanin et al.

suggest the diagnosis of possible IBM on the basis of `rimmed vacuoles' in frozen muscle tissue. Actually, Fig. 4(b) from their paper shows numerous non-rimmed central or subsarcolemmal vacuoles that are, in our opinion, strongly suggestive of an artefact as a consequence of improper handling of the muscle tissue. All laboratories with experience in frozen muscle tissue 3,4 are unpleasantly familiar with this and other artefacts, to the extent that some classical textbooks of muscle pathology include a chapter on artefacts. 5±7 In the present case, and in view of the provocative suggestion of an association between paraneoplastic DM and IBM, effort should be taken to demonstrate unequivocally the typical features of IBM such as beta-amyloid deposition or filamentous inclusions in semithin or ultrathin sections.

We believe that the scientific information derived from this article will be confusing for physicians caring for similar patients, and this is particularly true with the growing tendency for busy physicians only to read the abstracts of medical papers (easily available using electronic devices) instead of the full articles. In the present case, readers of the abstract could be aware of a very rare association of paraneoplastic DM with IBM, as no details of muscle pathology are reported in the abstract.

J.M.GRAU M.PEREA

Muscle Research Unit, Hospital Cli Â nic IDIBAPS, Villaroel 170, 08036 Barcelona, Spain Supported by FIS 99/023 Chronic ulcerative stomatitis: antibodies reacting with the 70-kDa molecule react with epithelial nuclei Sir, Chronic ulcerative stomatitis (CUS) is an entity independently described by two groups in 1990. Clinically, it is characterized by oral ulceration resembling erosive lichen planus. Immunologically, it is marked, on indirect immunofluorescence (IIF), by circulating antibodies directed to nuclei of stratified epithelia and not detectable on Hep2 cells or rat liver. 1,2 At present, only about 30 cases have been reported, but its incidence is probably higher. By immunoblotting, the sera of CUS patients, but not those of healthy controls, recognize a molecule in the range of 70 kDa 3 which has recently been identified as a member of p53 family. 4 However, it has not been proven that the antibodies directed against the 70-kDa molecule are the same as those detected by IIF on stratified epithelia.

To do so, we therefore eluted the IgG from the protein(s) that were covalently bound to nitrocellulose paper and challenged them in IIF on monkey oesophagus. According to the method of Olmsted, 5 proteins extracted from normal epidermis were electrophoresed onto a large sheet of nitrocellulose paper. Two vertical strips were cut, one from each side of the paper, incubated with CUS serum at 37 8C for 1 h in Tris-buffered saline (TBS)/milk and stained for alkaline phosphatase. This allowed the CUS antigen(s) to be identified as the 70-kDa band. The two stained strips were then relocated in their original positions at each side of the nitrocellulose paper, allowing the unstained CUS antigen/s in the remaining central portion to be identified. The unstained protein band, containing the CUS antigen/s, was then cut out in a horizontal strip which was incubated at 4 8C overnight with a CUS serum diluted 1: 25. The strip was then washed twice with a washing buffer (10 mmol L 21 Tris-HCl, 0´25 mol L 21 NaCl, 0´5% Nonidet P-40 pH 7´4) and three times with TBS. The bound antibodies were then eluted three times with 0´5 mol L 21 acetic acid, 0´5 mol L 21 NaCl pH 2´5 (total volume 2 mL per strip). Each elution lasted 1 h at room temperature. The eluted and neutralized antibodies were dialysed against phosphate-buffered saline and concentrated on an Amicon PM-10 filter (Amicon Corp., Lexington, MA, U.S.A.) to 5 mL. The antibodies were further Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjd/article/143/3/671/6691621 by University Of Illinois Library user on 10 March 2023 concentrated on a Minicon B15 unit (Amicon Corp.) to 350 mL, and again on speed vacuum to 30 mL. These antibodies were then biotinylated (EZ-Link Photoactivatable, Pierce, Rockford, IL, U.S.A.) and used for IIF. IIF was performed using streptavidin bound to fluorescein (Zymed, San Francisco, CA, U.S.A.).

A speckled nuclear binding pattern was observed on monkey oesophagus epithelium that was similar to the pattern previously reported on IIF using sera from patients from CUS. We conclude therefore that the antibodies which precipitate the 70-kDa molecule are the same as those that bind the nuclei of epithelial cells. The significance of the 70-kDa molecule remains to be determined.

Wells' syndrome and human immunodeficiency virus infection

Sir, Wells' syndrome (eosinophilic cellulitis) is a distinctive dermatosis which can be associated with haematological disorders, arthropod bites, drug administration, surgery or infections. 1 One patient with eosinophilic cellulitis and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection has been described. 2 In March 1999, a 46-year-old man with HIV infection was seen for recurrent massive swellings of soft tissue with occasional bullae in various body regions, especially the arms and trunk. The patient denied pain but complained of itching and burning. The episodes had begun 12 years previously, sometimes after vigorous exercise, occurred two or three times per year, lasted 1±2 weeks, and resolved spontaneously without scarring. He had occasionally been treated with antibiotics for presumed bacterial cellulitis. He also described intermittent urticaria-like lesions, which lasted a few hours and did not appear temporally related to the episodes of swelling.

A diagnosis of HIV infection had been made in 1985. In January 1999, with a viral load of 6200 copies mL 21 , he began treatment with nelfinavir, estavudine and didanosine. He had been treated in a methadone substitution programme for opioid withdrawal since January 1988. Additional medications were cotrimoxazole and folic acid since July 1998. He had had pulmonary tuberculosis in July 1998 and a previous perforated peptic ulcer.

Examination revealed an ill-defined oedematous erythematous plaque studded with ruptured vesicles and bullae on the right antecubital fossa (Fig. 1a), scattered urticarial lesions on the trunk and extremities, and prominent dermatographism. There was no hepatosplenomegaly or lymphadenopathy, nor symptoms of systemic disease.

A biopsy from the right arm revealed intraepidermal blisters, dermal oedema and a perivascular and interstitial inflammatory infiltrate consisting mainly of eosinophils. Abundant flame figures could be seen (Fig. 1b). There was no evidence of an infectious or vasculitic process and no foreign bodies were observed.

Full blood count and differential, chemistry profile, urinalysis, rapid plasma reagin test, antinuclear antibody and antibodies to Leishmania and Legionella were normal or negative. Viral load was , 50 copies mL 21 . Abnormal results were: mean corpuscular volume 114´1 fL (normal 78±102), aspartate aminotransferase 59 U L 21 (normal 1±40), alanine aminotransferase 67 U L 21 (normal 5±40), hepatitis C virus positive, hepatitis B virus superficial antigen negative but core and superficial antibodies positive, serum protein electrophoresis with gamma fraction of 20´3% (normal 8´4±18´3), CD41 T lymphocytes 312 cells mm 23 and CD81 T lymphocytes 1472 cells mm 23 .

Several cutaneous diseases feature oedema with eosinophilia, including Wells' syndrome and delayed pressure urticaria (DPU). 3 Because exercise was a possible trigger for the episodes in our patient, we considered the diagnosis of DPU. We favour the diagnosis of Wells' syndrome, however, because of the clinical and histopathological features. Blisters occur frequently in Wells' syndrome, 1,4±8 whereas only three patients with blisters and DPU have been published. 9 In our patient, the duration of the lesions was 1±2 weeks, in contrast to those of DPU which last a mean of 36 h (range 14´5 h to 3´5 days). 9,10 In addition, 66% of patients with DPU have generalized symptoms of malaise, fatigue, fever, chills, headache or generalized arthralgia at some stage of the disease, 10 whereas few systemic symptoms are reported with Wells' syndrome. 4 The histopathological finding of flame figures supports the diagnosis of Wells' syndrome as these Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjd/article/143/3/671/6691621 by University Of Illinois Library user on 10 March 2023 elements are not characteristic of DPU. 11 Furthermore, we have not found cases of DPU misdiagnosed as cellulitis as occurs in Wells' syndrome (and in our patient on several occasions). The lack of peripheral blood eosinophilia is unhelpful; as many as half the patients with Wells' syndrome have no blood eosinophilia. 1,12 Two cases of coexisting eosinophilic cellulitis and urticaria have been reported, 6 in one of which rubbing or pressure were possible precipitating factors for the eosinophilic cellulitis lesions. These authors considered Wells' syndrome to represent a severe urticarial hypersensitivity reaction.

The exact nosology of Wells' syndrome remains controversial. One possibility is that Wells' syndrome represents the extreme of a spectrum of urticarial conditions. 13 Wells himself discussed the relationship with urticaria with this sentence: `it is as though the tissue reaction should have been urticarial, but excess infiltration with eosinophils and release of their granules alters the reaction to a cellulitis with slight toxic damage to collagen surfaces requiring removal of debris by phagocytes'. 4 Nevertheless, although the syndrome shares features with severe forms of urticaria, it is distinct enough clinically and histologically to be considered a separate disease entity, at least until its cause is clarified. 14 The association of Wells' syndrome and HIV has been reported only once, 2 although other eosinophilic reactions have been related to HIV infection. The association of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome and eosinophilic pustular folliculitis may denote a derangement of the immune system. 15 Eosinophilic pustular folliculitis and eosinophilic cellulitis have been described coexisting in the same patient. 16 Recently, a mononuclear cell infiltrate with tissue eosinophilia and flame figures was described in a cutaneous reaction at the site of immunization with gp160 vaccination therapy in HIV-1-positive patients. Although the investigators postulated that insect antigens used in the preparation of the vaccine were the most likely candidates for this local reaction, they considered the HIV-1 disease itself to be among other precipitating factors. 17 Wells' syndrome is infrequent, and its association with HIV infection is even more uncommon. Its importance in this context is the possibility of misdiagnosing Wells' syndrome as cellulitis in this group of patients at risk for infection.  

Photodistributed telangiectasia following use of cefotaxime

Sir, Cephalosporins are widely used broad-spectrum antibiotics, potentially responsible for many skin reactions such as rash, pruritus, angio-oedema, urticaria, fixed drug eruption and erythema multiforme; to the best of our knowledge, telangiectasia in a photoexposed distribution following use of cephalosporins has not been previously reported An otherwise healthy 57-year-old man was referred in May 1999 with a 2-day history of telangiectatic skin lesions. He had been receiving 1 g cefotaxime intramuscularly twice daily for 7 days for a urinary tract infection. He was on no other medication, and there was no history of photosensitivity, rosacea or use of topical steroids.

Examination showed several asymptomatic spider-like telangiectasia widely distributed on the forehead (Fig. 1) and on the dorsa of both hands. Laboratory findings revealed leucocytosis (white cell count 11 Â 10 9 L 21 ) with a polymorphonuclear count of 8´4 Â 10 9 L 21 ; liver function tests were normal. Antinuclear antibodies, extractable nuclear antigens, Scl 70 antibody and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were negative. Skin biopsy demonstrated dilated capillaries without signs of vasculitis.

As the photoexposed distribution suggested a light-induced adverse reaction, phototesting was performed (Waldmann UV 800 equipped with TL20W/12 and Cleo UVA 40 W lamps). The minimal erythema doses for ultraviolet (UV) A (50 J cm 22 ) and UVB (85 mJ cm 22 ) were measured, and patch testing with standard photoallergens (F.I.R.M.A.) and 5% and 10% cefotaxime (Zariviz) in distilled water and petrolatum was performed: there were no pathological reactions. In a photoprovocation test, a single suberythematous dose of 30 J cm 22 UVA on the upper back produced telangiectatic lesions at 36 h, providing evidence of a photoinduced drug reaction.

Because of the evident relationship between administration of the antibiotic and onset of the telangiectasia, confirmed by phototesting, cefotaxime was stopped, with progressive improvement of cutaneous manifestations; complete resolution was observed 2 months after discontinuation of the implicated drug. Rechallenge with cefotaxime was not performed.

Iatrogenic telangiectasia is a poorly understood dermatological side-effect secondary to the administration of many drugs, 1 including lithium, thiotixene, interferon-alfa and isotretinoin. Telangiectasia localized to photoexposed sites has been described with the calcium channel blockers nifedipine 2±4 and amlodipine. 5,6 Photosensitivity has been reported in patients treated with calcium antagonists, and Collins and Ferguson 4 documented the development of telangiectasia at 24 h on a UVA provocation test, suggesting light as a causal factor.

In our patient, the absence of other medication, the short time to onset of eruptive telangiectatic lesions after administration of cefotaxime and the progressive resolution after discontinuation of the drug, together with the positive results of the photoprovocation test, are very suggestive of a photoinduced drug reaction. Cephalosporins are known to be associated with several cutaneous side-effects, 1 varying from contact dermatitis to toxic epidermal necrolysis; there are only two reports on photosensitivity, 7,8 and none regarding telangiectasia. Telangiectasia is probably a dermatological side-effect of many medications and more common than reported in the literature. Hypereosinophilic dermatosis: skin lesions as the only manifestation of the idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome?

Sir, Idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES) is characterized by persistent eosinophilia [total eosinophil count (TEC) . 1´5 Â 10 9 L 21 for at least 6 months], lack of evidence for any other recognized cause of eosinophilia, systemic multiple organ involvement, and absence of leukaemic markers. 1 Skin lesions occur with a mean reported incidence of 56%, 2 but cutaneous findings as the only manifestation of HES are very rare. 3 We describe a 23-year-old woman who presented in February 1999 with diffuse itchy cutaneous lesions of 4 months' duration. The first lesion was a large pruritic erythematous and oedematous plaque in her left axilla. She had no other symptoms, no fever and no evidence of underlying infectious processes. She had not travelled outside the country. There was no personal or family history of atopy, and her only previous medication (more than 1 month before onset of symptoms) had been a proprietary analgesic for headache, which contained indomethacin, caffeine and prochlorperazine. Within a month of the first lesion, many other similar lesions had become apparent, preceded by intense pruritus.

A review of her medical records documented a TEC . 1´5 Â 10 9 L 21 since the beginning of December 1998, and normal total IgE level. Treatment with oral corticosteroids had been commenced at that time but it neither completely eliminated the skin lesions nor reduced the eosinophilia. It was only after several clinical relapses that she was referred to our clinic. Examination revealed large annular erythematous plaques with indurated borders and itchy urticarial lesions involving the limbs, buttocks, trunk and neck. After hospitalization, in the same month, she also developed persistent evening fever with negative inflammation indices [erythrocyte sedimentation rate 7 mm in the first hour (normal 0±20); C-reactive protein 3 mg mL 21 (normal , 10); rheumatoid factor negative; antistreptococcal and antistaphylococcal titres negative].

The first pertinent findings were: total white cell count 11´8 Â 10 9 L 21 and TEC 4´9 Â 10 9 L 21 (42%); lactate dehydrogenase 500 IU L 21 (normal 210±460); normal total IgE serum concentration (2 IU mL 21 , normal , 25); absence of circulating immune complexes; reduction of both total haemolytic complement activity (CH50) and C3, C4 and C1q binding capacity; C1 esterase inhibitor level 273 mg L 21 (normal 300±360); absence of cryoglobulins and of neoplastic markers; no evidence of parasitic infestation on five different stool examinations; moderate reduction in CD81 and CD81CD571 T lymphocytes; no evidence of underlying malignancies such as eosinophilic leukaemia or lymphoma on clinical, laboratory and radiographic studies; normal electrocardiogram, echocardiogram, chest X-ray, abdominal ultrasonography and computed tomographic scans of the abdomen and pelvis; normal neurological and ophthalmological examinations. Skin biopsy demonstrated chronic superficial and spongiotic dermatitis with numerous eosinophilic granulocytes (EG) in the perivascular inflammatory infiltrate. Bone marrow aspirate showed a slight hypercellular marrow with an excess of mature EG and no trace of blast cells.

After a short period of recovery during which she received no therapy, a second hospitalization was needed because of flaring of her skin disease, including large bullous lesions containing light serous liquid, and profound swelling of her legs (Fig. 1). Tzank smear of the bullous lesions showed the presence of many EG, few lymphocytes and rare erythrocytes. Biopsy of a bullous lesion revealed a perivascular inflammatory infiltrate, again with numerous EG, and dermal± epidermal separation with the appearance of a dystrophic intraepidermal bullous lesion. Direct immunofluorescence demonstrated dermal perivascular immune complex deposition of IgM, C3 and C1q, and absence of antibasement membrane zone antibodies and antidesmosome autoantibodies; indirect immunofluorescence studies were negative. Laboratory studies revealed the following values: 49% EG; absence of anticardiolipin antibodies, and negative lupus anticoagulant, antinuclear antibodies, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) and extractable nuclear antibodies.

Daily steroid therapy was commenced with 5 mg betamethasone for 10 days and antihistamine drugs. The steroid Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjd/article/143/3/671/6691621 by University Of Illinois Library user on 10 March 2023 was gradually tapered and twice daily cyclosporin was added, which thus far has been adequate to keep the disease under control.

In order to be able to make a diagnosis of idiopathic HES it is necessary to search carefully for causative and influencing factors such as allergens or medicaments. Extensive testing is usually important to evaluate the possible presence of infectious (parasitic) processes, underlying malignancies or autoimmune diseases. Undifferentiated connective tissue disease could be ruled out in this case by the laboratory findings. Churg±Strauss syndrome was excluded because of the absence of pulmonary symptoms (asthma), negative ANCA and the absence of characteristic cutaneous histological features. Allergic and parasitic diseases were unlikely possibilities because the total IgE level was normal; the histological appearance of the bullous lesions and the results of direct immunofluorescence led us to reject immunobullous dermatoses.

The differential diagnosis in our patient might include Wells syndrome because of the recurrent swellings on the legs. However, the persistent peripheral blood eosinophilia, the widespread nature of the cutaneous lesions and, above all, the lack of the distinctive ``flame figures'' in the histopathological tissue, made the diagnosis unlikely. Considering the results of all the tests we performed, we concluded that our patient's clinical picture was consistent with the diagnosis of benign type HES. 3,4 HES may be the result either of eosinophilic differentiation of a clone of neoplastic cells or due to reactive eosinophilia. In some patients HES seems to be idiopathic. A few cases of idiopathic HES are consequent to cytokine secretion, whereas others remain idiopathic throughout their course. When eosinophilia occurs as a feature of an acute or chronic myeloid leukaemia, or a chronic myeloproliferative disorder, the eosinophils are usually part of the leukaemic clone. 5,6 However, eosinophilia in association with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia is usually reactive: neoplastic lymphoid cells may secrete cytokines [including interleukin (IL)-2, IL-3, IL-5 and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor] that possess eosinophilopoietic activity and promote eosinophil differentiation.

In cases of reactive eosinophilias such as infections, allergies, drug reactions, connective tissue diseases and malignancies, the associated eosinophilia is due to stimulation by IL-5 secreted by T cells. A clonal population of T cells with an abnormal phenotype that secretes IL-5 seems to be present in some patients with idiopathic HES, but it is not known if these cells arise as a response to chronic inflammation (e.g. inflammatory skin disease) or whether they represent the precursors of neoplastic T cells. 7 In HES, the pathogenic effect of eosinophils is evidenced by eosinophil activation and degranulation at the site of tissue injury, with release of cytotoxic granule proteins. Circulating eosinophils are recruited into the tissues, largely through the action of T-cell cytokines and chemokines. Regulated upon activation normal T-cell expressed and secreted (RANTES) was the first CC chemokine shown to produce eosinophil chemotaxis. In addition, eotaxin, monocyte chemoattractant protein (MCP)-3, MCP-4 and to some extent MCP-2 and MCP-1a, are chemotactic for eosinophils. Virtually all inflammatory conditions studied have demonstrated increased levels of chemokines. It is likely that the presence of some cytokines such as IL-5, IL-12 and interferons modulate the response of eosinophils to RANTES. 8 The therapy of idiopathic HES is largely directed at controlling symptoms and preventing organ damage by eosinophils. Many different therapies have been used, with different and sometimes encouraging results. Progress in knowledge of the regulatory mechanisms controlling the eosinophil reaction could lead to more sophisticated therapeutic approaches in the future. Blue rubber bleb naevus syndrome: an unusual cause of urethral bleeding Sir, A 36-year-old Afro-Caribbean man was admitted acutely to our hospital with a 1-day history of heavy urethral bleeding. There were no other urological symptoms and no history of trauma. He was known to have blue rubber bleb naevus syndrome (BRBNS). He had previously undergone two Nd-YAG laser coagulation treatments of bleeding upper gastrointestinal haemangiomas and had had several local excisions of painful cutaneous lesions in the past. He took ferrous sulphate on a long-term basis. On examination, he had multiple asymptomatic cutaneous soft, reddish/blue nodules over his torso, upper limbs and scalp. He was haemodynamically stable. There were no other abnormal examination findings. On admission, his haemoglobin was 9´9 g dL 21 , with normal electrolytes and clotting screen. His urine microscopy was negative, apart from a large number of red blood cells. Renal ultrasound scan showed no obvious haemangiomas. A penile ultrasound scan, with the urethra distended with lignocaine gel, showed the presence of a 1-cm ovoid lesion in the mid-shaft of the penis that protruded into the urethral lumen. It was vascular on colour flow Doppler, consistent with the diagnosis of a haemangioma (Fig. 1). This was confirmed with flexible cystourethroscopy. No intravesical cause for the bleeding was seen. The patient was managed conservatively and the urethral bleeding settled within 48 h. His haemoglobin on discharge was 10´5 g dL 21 .

To date, he remains well and has had no further episodes of urethral bleeding. BRBNS is a rare, usually sporadic, condition affecting the venous circulation, resulting in the formation of cutaneous and mucosal haemangiomas. First described by Bean in 1958, 1 only approximately 200 cases have been reported to date in the literature. The syndrome is usually present from birth or childhood; 2 Afro-Caribbean individuals are only occasionally affected, BRBNS presenting more frequently in caucasians. Cutaneous lesions are always present and consist of multiple reddish/blue, soft, compressible nodules with overlying hyperhidrosis. 2 They are typically asymptomatic. Mucosal lesions predominantly affect the gastrointestinal tract and may bleed, resulting in either acute or chronic blood loss. Acute management of actively bleeding lesions has been successfully achieved using Nd-YAG laser therapy. 3 In the urinary tract, haemangiomas have occasionally been described in the kidney 4 and urinary bladder. 5 Detection has been performed using thallium-labelled red blood cells 4 and ultrasound/magnetic resonance imaging. 5 Treatment of the renal lesions has been conservative, 4 but those in the bladder required combination therapy with laser ablation and open partial cystectomy 5 as haematuria persisted. Treatment for urethral lesions is unclear, with either conservative or interventional options (with Nd-YAG laser therapy) being possible, depending upon the degree of urethral bleeding.

As our patient's urethral bleeding settled with conservative management, no further treatment has been instituted at this time. This is because of the concern that Nd-YAG therapy to the urethra may induce late stricture formation. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of clinical presentation due to a urethral haemangioma as part of the BRBNS. J.R.WILSON M.J.WESTON* P.SINGH I.EARDLEY  

Progressive nodular histiocytomas

Sir, There is still confusion in the classification of histiocytic disorders, mainly due to the rarity of these diseases. Among the non±Langerhans cell histiocytoses, the progressive nodular histiocytoma is a very rare benign skin condition. We report a 25-year-old man with widespread asymptomatic yellowish papules and nodules all over the skin surface with special involvement of his face. The first lesions appeared 14 years ago on his face, between the eyebrows. Two years after initial onset, similar lesions had gradually begun to appear on the face and on other parts of his skin. His face was covered by hundreds of yellowish-pink papules and nodules varying in size from 3 to 10 mm (Fig. 1a). Larger fibrous nodules were present on the scalp, scrotum, palms and soles. The larger lesions showed overlying telangiectasia which gave them a red-brown colour. There was no spontaneous regression or ulceration of these nodules. The rest of the physical examination was normal. There was no family history of any similar condition. Complete blood analysis showed no abnormalities and repeated plasma lipids and lipoprotein studies, and urinalysis, were normal.

X-ray of thorax and skull, and ultrasonographic examination of the abdomen, were within normal limits. There was no ocular conjunctival involvement and ear, nose and throat examination showed few nodules on the nasal mucosa.

Biopsy of a new papular lesion from the face revealed an infiltration involving the full thickness of the dermis. The infiltrate was composed of histiocytes with abundant vacuolated clear cytoplasm and many multinucleated Touton-like giant cells (Fig. 1b). Among these histiocytes a moderate number of lymphocytes and plasma cells were observed. In another biopsy specimen, taken from an older nodular lesion of the arm, fibrosis was evident and Touton-like giant cells were nearly absent. Immunohistochemical studies showed a strong positivity for macrophages, especially by CD68 and CD15 antibodies. S100 protein and CD1 antibodies were negative. Electron microscopic examination revealed histiocytes with a large indented nucleus, and no Birbeck granules were observed.

Treatment, including systemic corticosteroids, and cyclophosphamide (150 mg d 21 ), did not influence the lesions.

The clinical features of our patient are identical to cases reported by Taunton et al. 1 and Burgdorf et al. 2 This patient had a normal level of lipids and two kinds of skin lesion: superficial yellow papules and deep large nodules. According to Burgdorf 's classification, the lesions on our patient belong clearly to the `macrophage marker positive, S100 and CD1 negative, and Birbeck negative' group. 3 The histological and immunochemical results of progressive nodular histiocytoma are similar to those in eruptive histiocytosis, benign cephalic histiocytosis and juvenile xanthogranuloma (JXG), but the clinical expression of these diseases is obviously different. In eruptive histiocytosis, the onset of lesions is extremely rapid and spontaneous resolution may occur, leaving hyperpigmented plaques, which was not the case in our patient. Benign cephalic histiocytosis is usually located on the face but may be generalized. However, it seems to be self-healing. 4 As progressive nodular histiocytoma has a identical histological picture with some variants of JXG, this is the first differential diagnosis. 5 In typical JXG, one or several papules and nodules of 0´5±1´0 cm in diameter appear during the first year of life; 20% of the lesions are even present at birth. Rapid growth of lesions can be seen in children, but they almost always regress spontaneously. Systemic complications such as glaucoma and bleeding into the anterior chamber occurs in 10% of young patients. By contrast, in our patient, the disease began in late childhood and progressed for more than 14 years, and new lesions still continue to appear. Our observation has many features in common with the 

Periorbital heliotrope oedema as the only initial clinical manifestation of systemic lupus erythematosus in a primigravida

Sir, Heliotrope oedema of the eyelids is a common cutaneous manifestation of dermatomyositis, and is also noted in about 4´8% of cases of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). 1 However, it is quite rare as the initial presentation of SLE. We report a primigravida who had heliotrope oedema of the eyelids as the first clinical manifestation of SLE, which, to our knowledge, has never been described in detail in the English language literature.

A 27-year-old woman presented with asymptomatic, erythematous swelling of both eyelids that had developed at the beginning of her pregnancy 8 weeks previously. No Raynaud's phenomenon, photosensitivity, arthralgia or muscle weakness was noted. On examination, the eyelids were purpuric and oedematous, without any scaling or telangiectasia (Fig. 1a). The changes particularly affected the upper eyelids and were much more marked on the left side. Movement of the extraocular muscles was free; neither episcleral haemorrhage nor proptosis was noted.

Screening tests revealed normal full blood count and biochemistry (creatinine 0´7 mg dL 21 ; albumin 3´8 g dL 21 ). She had a mildly decreased level of C3 (70´4 mg dL 21 ; normal 81´61±118´41), positive antinuclear antibodies (fluorescent antibody titre 1:640, speckled pattern) and anti-dsDNA (radioimmunoassay, 20´5 IU mL 21 ; normal , 12). As there were no systemic signs or symptoms, she was not treated but kept under observation. One month later, she still had persistent eyelid oedema, and further tests for antiextractable nuclear antigens (double immunodiffusion) and antiphospholipid antibodies (diluted Russell viper venom test and anticardiolipin antibody) were negative. However, complement deficiency was not ruled out because measurement of CH50 was not performed.

At the 19th week of her pregnancy, prednisolone 15 mg daily and aspirin 200 mg daily were given for the persistent eyelid oedema. Towards the end of the pregnancy, the dosage of prednisolone was gradually tapered to 5 mg daily. She developed a high level of anti-dsDNA (118´6 IU mL 21 ) and thrombocytopenia (platelets 56 Â 10 9 L 21 ), but gave birth to a healthy, full-term baby, and shortly afterwards decided to discontinue her prednisolone treatment. Two weeks later, she presented with severe abdominal pain, oral ulceration, mild fever (37´5 8C) and arthralgia. The level of anti-dsDNA was 485 IU mL 21 . Thus, after 8 months of follow-up, her illness finally fulfilled the American Rheumatism Association diagnostic criteria for SLE. She was treated with prednisolone 20 mg daily. At the last visit, 1 month after the delivery, the eyelid oedema had subsided. Prominent telangiectasia appeared on the upper eyelids and cheeks (Fig. 1b).

Heliotrope oedema of the eyelids has been reported in connective tissue diseases other than dermatomyositis. Among them, cutaneous discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE) is most frequently described. 2±6 The eyelid oedema may appear before or after the appearance of DLE lesions. If DLE lesions are present, they are usually located on the eyelids or face.

SLE-related eyelid oedema was first described by Tuffanelli and Dubois. 1 They followed up 520 patients over a 13-year period. Only one patient had periorbital oedema as the initial manifestation of SLE, but there is no comment about any other concurrent cutaneous lesion. Carr et al. 7 reported probable SLE in a patient who had heliotrope discoloration of the eyelids, palatal ulceration, leucopenia and thrombocytopenia as the initial manifestations. Smith and Pinals 8 reported two women with SLE-related eyelid oedema, one presenting with eyelid oedema, alopecia and malar rash as the initial manifestations, and the other developing eyelid oedema long after the diagnosis of SLE. Our patient is unusual in that heliotrope oedema of the eyelids was the only initial clinical manifestation of SLE.

Our report suggests that, when dealing with persistent eyelid oedema, SLE should be included in the differential diagnosis.

Y-S.DAI H-C.CHIU

Department of Dermatology, National Taiwan University Hospital, no. 7 Chung-Shan S. Road, 100 Taipei, Taiwan

Pyemotes dermatitis caused by indirect contact with husk rice

Sir, Pyemotes tritici is a soft-bodied arthropod most commonly found in straw or grain. It is a parasite of a variety of stored grain insects, but if environmental conditions limit its natural hosts, the mites may infest incidental hosts such as man. 1 We describe an episode of dermatitis caused by P. tritici, which spread from a bag of husk rice to two patients, a 56-year-old man and his 57-year-old wife.

Patient 1 was a 56-year-old landlord of a pub-style restaurant, who described rapid onset of many itchy red spots on his chest wall. He consulted his family physician because of the pruritic oedematous erythematous lesions with central vesicles on the upper extremities and chest wall, and was treated with oral corticosteroid and antihistamines under the diagnosis of insect bites. However, the lesions increased in number and began to spread on to his lower extremities. The same week, he visited our clinic with pruritic oedematous erythematous macules and papules distributed mainly over his trunk and limbs (Fig. 1a,b). Abnormal results of blood and urinary examinations suggested that he had developed severe diabetes mellitus and he was hospitalized to stabilize this new problem. White blood cell count and differential were normal. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 18 mm (normal 1±7) in the first hour and C-reactive protein (CRP) was 0´9 mg dL 21 (normal , 0´5). Due to his severe diabetic mellitus, oral corticosteroid was contraindicated, but topical corticosteroid ointment was started under the provisional diagnosis of erythema multiforme. Despite application for 3 days, numerous vesicles and pustules continued to develop all over the lower extremities. In addition to the skin lesions, he had a fever of 38´0 8C and developed a slightly raised ESR of 24 mm in the first hour and moderately raised CRP of 5´4 mg dL 21 . White blood cell count was within normal limits but the differential showed a high neutrophil count of 6´07 Â 10 9 L 21 .

Biopsy from a skin lesion on the left thigh revealed extensive spongiotic vesicles and subepidermal blisters containing neutrophils, eosinophils and lymphocytes (Fig. 1c). There was a sparse diffuse infiltrate of eosinophils and neutrophils in the dermis, and a denser infiltrate of neutrophils, eosinophils and lymphocytes around blood vessels. Within days after hospitalization, he stopped developing new skin lesions, ESR and CRP were significantly reduced and the fever resolved. Treatment with oral antihistamines and topical corticosteroid made all the skin lesions disappear, leaving slight pigmentation.

Patient 2 was the 57-year-old wife of patient 1, who helped in his restaurant. A few days after her husband was seen, she visited our clinic with skin lesions similar to those of her husband, namely multiple erythematous lesions with central vesicles on her chest and upper extremities, which she had had for 3 days. All laboratory investigations were normal. The histopathological findings in patient 1 and the clinical course and appearance in both patients suggested that there was some relationship to an attack by insects.

More precise information obtained by further interview of patient 1 is as follows. One day before getting the itchy spots, he had visited his brother, who was a farmer, in the countryside. The brother gave him a bag filled with husk rice which had been kept under normal temperature in a cattle barn for 1 year. He took the bag home and kept it under the stairs in his house, where their work clothes were hung, partly in contact with the bag.

Samples of the husk rice were soaked in ethyl alcohol and the deposits were examined under a microscope. A large number of P. tritici mites (Fig. 1d) was isolated from the deposits, but we could not find any host insects of P. tritici. Two thousand Pyemotes mites were found in 400 grains of husk rice. Therefore, we diagnosed this condition as Pyemotes dermatitis.

All species of Pyemotes are primarily parasitic on insect hosts which often infest wheat, barley, straw, beans, peas, cottonseed, tobacco, hay, grass and broom corn. 2 When prolonged storage or other factors deplete or eliminate its natural food supply, P. tritici may pass from the infested grain or straw on to man or lower animals, causing pruritic dermatitis. 1,3 The distribution of P. tritici is apparently worldwide, as it has been reported from Europe, Africa, Eastern Asia, Australia and the U.S.A. 4 In Japan, in some areas, the old and well-maintained custom is that rice with the husk is stored under normal temperature conditions. Therefore, there have been some reports of Pyemotes dermatitis caused by contact with husk rice. The symptoms appear acutely (usually 12±16 h after mite attack). The typical skin lesion is a weal or bright red papule surmounted by a vesicle or pustule. The weal usually subsides after 48±72 h if not excoriated, but may persist for several days if scratched. 5 In some cases, affected patients have systemic symptoms such as fever, diarrhoea, anorexia and malaise. 4 Treatment relies wholly on removing the source of the mites. The carbamate insecticide carbamyl and methylbromide are used to eliminate the mites and their hosts from the infested material. 2,6 Patients with Pyemotes dermatitis require no specific treatment other than antipruritic treatment. For occupational exposure, mite repellents such as sulphur or gammabenzene hexachloride ointment, combined with the application of olive oil, may allay the mites. 5 In our cases, patient 1 had a long and frequent contact with infested clothes and developed not only skin, but also systemic symptoms, whereas his wife had a short contact and developed only skin symptoms. This difference in duration of contact may explain the different severity. The biopsy specimen obtained from patient 1 showed a broad and extensive form of severe insect bite.

Pyemotes dermatitis has been known as an occupational dermatitis. Generally, outbreaks have been confined to individuals employed in the harvesting, transportation or storage of grains or straw infested with these ectoparasites, 4 but there have recently been some outbreaks of Pyemotes dermatitis in a town where there was apparently no connection with natural products. 2,4,6 In addition, our patients lived in Fukuoka City, where the population is over 1 million, and whose occupants are not normally considered to be at risk of exposure to these mites.

Dermatologists observing patients with unexplained dermatoses should consider the possibility of Pyemotes dermatitis and investigate the personal environment of the patients. Sir, Onychomycosis is a common infection, often involving tonails. 1 Terbinafine is effective in the treatment of dermatophyte infections of the nails. 2 In reports on the effect of terbinafine in treatment of toenail onychomycosis, 12-month follow-up is commonly used. 2 Longer follow-up studies are rare. The aim of the present study was to evaluate treatment results after 5±6 years. During 1992 and 1993, 117 outpatients were treated for toenail onychomycosis. In two cases the treatment was stopped within 3 weeks due to side-effects, urticaria and exanthematous rash, respectively. Four patients have died and one patient has had the leg with the toenails involved amputated. Thus, the follow-up study comprised 110 patients, 73 men and 37 women. The median age at treatment was 48 years (range 19±82).

The criteria for treatment were the clinical diagnosis of widespread toenail involvement and a mycological diagnosis by microscopy and culture. Previous treatment with griseofulvin was reported by 22%; none had received terbinafine. Treatment was instituted with oral terbinafine, 250 mg daily for 3 months, and in a few cases for a further month. In 18% another treatment period of 3 months was given within 1±2 years.

Five to 6 years after the initial treatment, all patients were sent a questionnaire regarding the effect of the treatment and current signs of mycotic nail infection. They were also invited to visit the clinic free of charge for a clinical and mycological re-examination. One hundred and six individuals (96%) replied, and 65 of these came for the follow-up.

According to the questionnaire, 34 individuals were completely free of toenail involvement after treatment (31%), 30 after the initial treatment and four after one further treatment. They declined the invitation to the follow-up. Seventytwo patients reported various degrees of nail involvement, seven of whom also declined the invitation because the changes were minimal. Thus, the follow-up group comprised 65 individuals, the sex and age distribution being the same as in the whole treatment group.

At the re-examination, the nails were clinically cured in five cases. In 54 cases there were minimal dystrophic nail changes limited to the distal or lateral part of one or two nails, giving very sparse specimens for mycological examination (microscopy and culture). The patients reported no or mild problems caused by the nail changes. In 17 of them, however, culture revealed presence of dermatophytes. In the remaining six patients there were nail changes clinically suspicious of mycotic infection, verified by culture, four at the first examination and two after repeated examination. They had never been free of nail changes following the initial treatment.

Thus, the present study shows that short-duration (3 months) oral terbinafine treatment gives a good long-term cure rate in toenail onychomycosis. In a few cases, a mycotic infection was found which indicated a need for repeated oral treatment. If one adds the number of individuals who selfreported absent or minimal nail involvement (41 patients) to the number of examined patients who had no or minimal dystrophic nail changes and negative mycological examination at follow-up (42 patients), then 78% can be classified as responders.

This result is comparable with that of previously reported follow-up studies with duration of over 2 years. To Èro Èk et al. followed 14 patients and reported 71% complete cure after 4 years. 3 Watson et al. found 73% responders among 77 patients after a median follow-up of 2´6 years; however, they accepted more extended clinial involvement as a response. 4 A number of factors may contribute to the incidence of fungal nail infections. One factor of importance is the state of the nails before they were infected, including various degrees of dystrophy. This may explain patients with residual dystrophic changes but negative mycology at follow-up. Sir, We read with interest the recent report on Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP) in dermatology patients 1 and would like to report a case of PCP in a patient with aggressive pyoderma gangrenosum treated with systemic corticosteroids followed by cyclosporin.

A 69-year-old caucasian woman presented with rapid onset of several ulcerating lesions on the limbs. Full clinical examination was normal. An incisional skin biopsy was consistent with the clinical diagnosis of pyoderma gangrenosum. Haematology, renal and liver function, urinalysis, autoantibodies including perinuclear and cytoplasmic immunofluorescent pattern antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, complement levels and cryoglobulins were normal or negative. Serum electrophoresis showed a monoclonal IgA band but further investigations ruled out a diagnosis of multiple myeloma. Computed tomographic scanning of the thorax, abdomen and pelvis was normal. She was commenced on a reducing dose of oral prednisolone (from 0´5 mg kg 21 daily) with an initial improvement in her skin lesions.

Three months later, she developed multiple painful, necrotic lesions on the trunk and limbs. There was no evidence of systemic vasculitis or infection. The dose of oral prednisolone was increased, but new lesions continued to appear. Because of the aggressive nature of the disease, oral cyclosporin (3 mg kg 21 daily) was started in view of recent reports of its efficacy 2,3 in pyoderma gangrenosum. Unfortunately, she continued to deteriorate, despite a subsequent increase in the dose of cyclosporin to 5 mg kg 21 daily. At this stage, she was apyrexial with an unremarkable physical examination except for her skin lesions. In particular, clinical examination of the respiratory system was normal. Biochemical tests showed acute renal failure and the cyclosporin was immediately stopped. Chest X-ray showed bilateral interstitial alveolar shadowing (Fig. 1) highly suggestive of PCP, and arterial blood gas sampling showed significant hypoxia. The diagnosis of PCP was confirmed by bronchoalveolar lavage aspirate showing the typical organisms on silver staining. High-dose intravenous sulphamethoxazole-trimethoprim (Septrin w , Glaxo Wellcome, Uxbridge, U.K.) and continuous positive airway pressure ventilation was immediately instituted. Despite intensive supportive therapy she died 5 days after the diagnosis of PCP was made. A request for a postmortem examination was declined by the relatives.

This case illustrates the rapidly fatal course of PCP in an immunosuppressed dermatology patient. While we initially suspected that she may have had an underlying malignancy, this was not confirmed on extensive investigation and the only associated finding was of monoclonal IgA gammopathy Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjd/article/143/3/671/6691621 by University Of Illinois Library user on 10 March 2023 which is a well-recognized association of pyoderma gangrenosum. 4 She had no risk factors for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection and a HIV test or CD4 count was not performed. We concluded that she was immunosuppressed solely due to her treatment with prednisolone and cyclosporin.

While we agree with Raychaudhuri and Siu 1 that there is a dearth of literature on PCP in dermatology patients, this is presumably because PCP occurring outside the setting of HIV infection, organ transplantation or malignancy is very rare. Our view is supported by the authors' own data on only four patients with dermatological diseases who developed PCP over a 16-year period in their region of Northern California. Suggested risk factors for the development of PCP based on our own case include combined immunosuppressive regimens involving cyclosporin, multiple sequential immunosuppressive agents, and the development of a relative or absolute lymphopenia.

It has been suggested that dermatologists should have a policy on PCP prophylaxis as adopted in the HIV and postorgan transplant population. 1 There is evidence that the mortality associated with PCP in the HIV-negative population is greater than in those who are HIV positive, 5 particularly in those individuals with underlying malignancy. 6 In addition, the risk of developing PCP may be higher in those non-HIVpositive patients who have been immunosuppressed with cyclosporin. 7 However, the risk of PCP in the dermatology population must be weighed against the risk of adverse effects from prophylactic regimens; for example, there is a high incidence of adverse effects, especially rashes, with Septrin w . Also, methods of tailoring the regimen for PCP prophylaxis to the population at risk while avoiding undue adverse effects are still debated. 8 Therefore, at present we would not advocate PCP prophylaxis for dermatology patients on immunosuppressive therapy.

However, we would suggest that those using immunosuppressive agents for patients with difficult dermatological conditions should have a high index of suspicion. PCP may present with non-specific symptoms such as malaise or confusion rather than the classical dry cough, fever and breathlessness. In addition, auscultation of the chest is often normal, even with widespread alveolar shadowing on the chest X-ray, as in our patient. Because respiratory examination may be unhelpful and even falsely reassuring, chest X-ray is mandatory with urgent referral to a respiratory unit for full assessment if indicated. We present the case of a 47-year-old man, a heavy smoker with an alcohol intake of over 80 g of ethanol per day. Because of a cavitated pneumonia in the right upper lobe (which was resolved but with no identified causal agent), he stopped consuming alcohol. He insidiously developed Six months later the patient observed the development of painless skin masses affecting the upper limbs and lumbosacral region with a bilateral symmetrical distribution. Magnetic resonance imaging showed large masses of unencapsulated adipose tissue (T1) containing areas of different signal (T2) (Fig. 1a,b). Histological study of the samples obtained by needle-aspiration of the lesions showed hypervascularized fibroadipose tissue.

MSL was first described by Sir Benjamin Brodie in 1846 2 and was later developed by Madelung, 3 Launois and Bensaude 4 who gave the name to the disease. The first clinical review appeared in 1910, 5 but it was not until 1984 that Enzi established a relationship between the disease and the presence of a peripheral neuropathy. 6 Presently, about 300 cases have been reported, mostly sporadic, with an annual incidence rate of 1:25,000 males, 1 predominantly in the Mediterranean areas. Occasionally, a familiar incidence has been reported with no consensus about the hypothetical autosomic transmission. 7 The possibility of a genetic background, the association with a high alcohol intake, and the results of some experimental studies 8 have led to the most currently accepted theory about the aetiopathogenesis of the disease. Acting as a concomitant or triggering factor on a genetically predisposed subject, alcohol may induce a dysfunction of the mitochondrial DNA in the muscle, peripheral nerve, central nervous system and adipose tissue (and perhaps others), leading to an abnormal resistance of the brown fat adipose tissue to physiological adrenergic lipolysis, with the consequent formation of the masses.

The most significant histological findings in the lipomatous masses are the characteristic absence of a capsule, the frequent hypervascularization, the proliferation of the fibrous tissue and the small adipocytes, which suggests hyperplasia instead of hypertrophy as the mechanism of formation of the masses. 9 The peripheral nerves are surprisingly normal with the absence of axonal demyelination or degeneration. 1,10 MSL has been classified as type I (for some authors the real Madelung's disease), characterized by masses distributed in the upper half of the body, weight loss, and possible deep accumulation of adipose tissue (i.e. mediastinal), and type II, which is more difficult to differentiate from simple obesity, with diffuse involvement, weight gain and the absence of deep involvement. This classification is not related to differences in prognosis. Different clinical and investigation results can be found, probably depending on alcoholism and not on lipomatosis itself. The polyneuropathy of the MSL stands out from other symptoms because of its morbidity; it affects about 85% of cases with MSL, 80% of whom will progress to being incapacitated. 1,10 It may appear as an autonomic, sensory or motor neuropathy with proximal predominance, and may be associated with neuropathic skin lesions and Charcot's arthropathy. 11 It usually has an insidious onset several years after the formation of the lipomatous masses. Nevertheless, there are published case reports of early development of neuropathy. 1,10 The evolution is always stable or progressive with no reported cases of improvement 1,10 and with no effective therapy at present. From a prognostic point of view, the autonomic disturbances such as sweating, tachycardia at rest, and impotence are considered as unfavourable prognostic indicators due to their association with sudden death. 1 Neurophysiological examination demonstrates a reduction in motor and sensory conduction velocities which have a negative correlation with the duration of the disease. Finally, as already mentioned, histological descriptions are noteworthy, showing loss of larger myelinated fibres and chronic distal atrophy without demyelination or axonal degeneration.

A point of interest is the possible relationship between the neuropathy and alcoholism, which is almost constantly present, rather than a possible relationship between the neuropathy and the MSL. Nevertheless, many publications distinguish it from alcoholism based on the following: (1) alcoholic neuropathy frequently shows axonal degeneration and demyelination; 10 (2) clinical and electrophysiological neuropathy appears in non-alcoholic patients with MSL; 1 (3) there is a high prevalence of Charcot's arthropathy in MSL, unlike in chronic alcoholism, where it is unusual; 1 and (4) there is an absence of a correlation between the conduction velocities and the alcohol intake. 12 Therefore, the neuropathy would be an integral constituent of the clinical picture of the MSL.

In conclusion, based on its onset and development after stopping alcohol intake, the histological normality, without axonal degeneration or demyelination, and the absence of another plausible explanation like a neoplasm, diabetes, uremia, amiloidosis, etc., with the peculiarity that the onset of the polyneuropathy occurred a long time before the development of the lipomatous masses, which increases the particularity of this case, we consider that the reported case fulfils the conditions of a diagnosis of MSL type II or Madelung's disease with associated polyneuropathy. E.SAIZ HERVA Â S M.MARTI Â N LLORENS J.LO Â PEZ ALVAREZ Department of Internal Medicine, Prõ Âncipe de Asturias University Hospital, Alcala Â de Henares, Madrid, Spain. E-mail: saizhervas@jazzfree.com ventricular hypertrophy. There was also a tortuous rightsided aortic arch in a cervical position with Doppler flow characteristics indicative of coarctation of the aorta. The left subclavian artery arose aberrantly from a diverticulum in the descending aorta. Treatment of her haemangioma was initiated with intravenous methylprednisolone followed by oral steroids (3 mg kg day 21 ) and alpha interferon (1 million units m 22 day 21 ). Regression of the haemangioma was associated with relief of her tracheal obstruction and the ability to maintain her own airway. She was extubated 9 days after starting treatment with steroids. Alpha interferon was stopped 3 weeks later because of persistant neutropenia and she was maintained on a tapering dose of oral steroids.

Cardiac catheterization and angiography were performed to evaluate her unusual aortic arch anatomy prior to surgery for coarctation. This confirmed a right sided cervical aortic arch with a long segment stenosis (Fig. 1b). She underwent successful repair of her coarctation at the age of 6 months with placement of a 10-mm Goretex tube between the ascending and descending aorta. Following surgery, she remained well with no recurrence of her respiratory symptoms and improvement of her peripheral pulses, despite weaning her off steroid therapy.

Haemangiomas of the head and neck region are common benign endothelial tumours of childhood. Rarely, they are associated with subglottic haemangiomas which may precipitate an acute respiratory emergency. 1,2 A number of reports have documented an association between head and neck haemangiomas and anomalies of the major blood vessels of the head and neck region. 3±7 In some, the haemangiomas have been associated with atypical anatomy of the coarctation and a disproportionately higher incidence of right-sided coarctation of the aorta (Table 1). Right-sided coarctation as an isolated cardiac anomaly is uncommon with a limited number of cases being reported in the literature. 5 It is thought that the relative length and position of the arterial duct in a right aortic arch favours flow round the arch and through the isthmus rather than through the duct. The increased flow through the isthmus decreases the likelihood of coarctation. 8 The aortic arch anatomy in our patient was unusual not only because of right-sided coarctation but also because the aortic arch was situated in a cervical position. Coarctation of the aorta presenting in infancy usually occurs in close proximity to the arterial duct and is associated with an obstructive ridge within the aortic lumen with or without hypoplasia of the transverse arch. 9 Fig. 1(b) demonstrates that the coarctation site in our patient is separate from the likely origin of the ductus with no discrete obstructive ridge present. Instead there is a long segment of aortic narrowing followed by a large dilated segment of descending aorta proximal to the origin of the left subclavian artery. The unusual site and atypical nature of coarctation in these patients is reflected in the complex nature of the surgery required to repair the coarctation (Table 1).

Two previous case reports have documented patients in whom there were head and neck haemangiomas with airway involvement as well as coarctation in a right-sided cervical aortic arch. 3,10 In Vaillant et al., 3 the site of coarctation in this patient is described as being in the horizontal part of the arch, which is unlikely to be related to the site of ductal insertion. The unusual aortic arch anatomy with atypical site of coarctation would suggest that the luminal narrowing of the aorta at the coarctation site is not associated with the presence of ductal tissue and might have been present during fetal life. The existence of head and neck haemangiomas with airway haemangiomas as well as coarctation of a right-sided cervical aortic arch cannot be a simple coincidence and a causal relationship is likely. It is possible that aortic arch obstruction which is present during fetal life may predispose to localized uncontrolled endothelial proliferation proximal to the site of narrowing, leading to the development of head and neck haemangiomas. This may not occur as frequently in leftsided arch obstruction because of the difference in flow characteristics in a right vs. a left-sided aortic arch during fetal life and the relationship between left-sided coarctation and the insertion of the arterial duct. At Great Ormond Street Hospital, of the last 50 patients with left-sided coarctation of the aorta one had a head and neck haemangioma; in contrast, there are only 10 patients with right-sided coarctation reported in the medical literature, of whom four had haemangiomas of the head and neck.

In conclusion, paediatricians and dermatologists should be aware of these potentially life-threatening complications in a child who presents with an extensive haemangioma on the head and neck. 

Histological changes in naevi with superimposed psoriasis

Sir, We describe here two cases of melanocytic naevi with superimposed psoriatic dermal and epidermal alterations. Two distinct types of architectural and cytological modifications seem to have been triggered in the two naevi by the accidental coincidence with the psoriatic process. In the first case, an important architectural modification of the junctional and intraepidermal component of the naevus is evident, so much so that the naevus closely simulates a malignant melanoma (and had been previously diagnosed as a melanoma).

In the second case, the psoriatic inflammatory process is accompanied by an inflammatory regression of the naevus cells and a pattern histologically very close to that of halo naevus (naevus with halo phenomenon, Sutton naevus) is present. Our findings demonstrate that psoriasis can heavily alter the histological morphology of melanocytic naevi when these two common pathological entities accidentally collide, with important consequences from a diagnostic point of view. A pigmented melanocytic lesion was excised from the back of a 40-year-old man who had a long duration of preceding plaque psoriasis. Histologically the melanocytic lesion showed benign-looking cytological characteristics but with two peculiar architectural alterations. At the dermo-epidermal junction there was an evident disorder in the distribution of the melanocytic nests (Fig. 1a). The nests varied in size and shape and were occasionally confluent. Along the rete ridges, a definite lentiginous pattern (melanocytes arranged in single units) was prominent. The second relevant alteration of the lesion was a pagetoid spread of some melanocytes well above the dermo-epidermal junction (Fig. 1b). This pagetoid spread was predominant in the middle portion of the lesion. These two details were not suggestive of a naevus, but indicative of a malignant melanoma 1 (and the lesion had been diagnosed as melanoma elsewhere). The epidermis in which the naevus was located showed the classical clues for a bona-fide diagnosis of psoriasis: 2 elongation of rete ridges, pallor of the cells of the spinous layer, lack of granular layer, parakeratosis in the cornified layer, neutrophils in parakeratotic mounds (so called Munro's microabscesses), and focal spongiosis with neutrophilic exocytosis (so called Kogoj's spongiform pustules). We therefore diagnosed this case as collision of a plaque of psoriasis and a melanocytic naevus (with architectural modifications simulating a malignant melanoma).

Case 2.

A pigmented lesion was excised from a 30-year-old man. Histologically (Fig. 1c) the general appearance of this lesion was that of a lichenoid dermatitis-like lichenoid drug eruption or lichen planus. This lichenoid pattern was in strong contrast to other alterations of the epidermis which were diagnostic for psoriasis, consisting of elongation of rete ridges, absence (or gaps) of the granular layer, and classical collections of neutrophils in parakeratotic mounds (so called Munro's abscesses). This inflammatory lesion therefore seemed to be a bizarre combination of psoriasis and lichenoid dermatitis: two entities known as mutually exclusive or very rarely associated. 3 However, this diagnosis of an inflammatory process contrasted with the clinical impression of a pigmented lesion (the clinical suspicion was of a melanocytic naevus in a psoriatic patient). In order to check the clinical diagnosis an immunostain for S100 (YLEM cod. CCE812) and Melan-A (YLEM cod. MCV941) was performed. The immunostaining revealed many melanocytes at the dermo-epidermal junction, extending into the papillary dermis. Some were organized in a nested pattern. Melanocytes were not detectable by haematoxylin and eosin (H & E) stain because of the overwhelming preponderance of the inflammatory infiltrate and the regression of most of the melanocytes themselves. The `interface dermatitis' noted on the H & E stain was demonstrated to be nothing more than the inflammatory infiltrate at the site of the junctional component of the naevus. In conclusion, the lesion was a combination of psoriasis and a melanocytic naevus that was undergoing inflammatory regression. These two cases show that important modifications of melanocytic naevi occur when they are involved by chance in the psoriatic process. 4 In the first case, important morphological alterations occurred in the lesion. The lesion was felt to be benign because the cytological details were those of a naevus, but it showed peculiar modifications much more suggestive of a melanoma, namely an abnormal architecture at the dermo-epidermal junction and a pagetoid spread of melanocytes above it. These details could be seen as diagnostic clues for melanoma. However, the peculiar architectural modifications at the junction can reasonably be interpreted as a consequence of the elongation of rete ridges and thinning of the suprapapillary plate (both typical features of psoriasis). These processes apparently reshape and disarrange the melanocytic nests at the junction and lay out the cells in a lentiginous pseudomelanomatous pattern. The pagetoid spread is probably attributable to the accelerated turnover of the epidermal keratinocytes, which, during their maturation and migration towards the uppermost part of the epidermis, could drag up the melanocytes.

The second case is different. It also consisted of a naevus combined with psoriasis, but in this case a form of inflammatory regression was apparently destroying the melanocytic component. It is impossible to make any hypothesis regarding this phenomenon; we can only speculate that the inflammatory psoriatic process in the epidermis in some way triggered an inflammatory process involving the naevus cells and caused their destruction. 5 The two cases we describe here indicate that profound morphological modifications can be present in the melanocytic naevi if they are involved, by chance, in a psoriatic lesion, so profound that a wrong histopathological diagnosis could be easily rendered. 

Acknowledgement This work was supported by a Samsung research grant. M-G.SONG H-G.MIN* S-Y.JUNG² J-M.YANG E-S.LEE Acknowledgements Thanks are due to Dr Barbara Zerega (Advanced Biotechnology Centre, University of Genoa) for her technical advice. A.PARODI E.COZZANI M.CACCIAPUOTI A.REBORA Department of Endocrinological and Metabolic Sciences, Section of Dermatology, University of Genoa, Viale Benedetto XV 7, 16132 Genoa, Italy E-mail: rebdermo@unige.it

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. Four months after grafting, two verrucous plaques occurred in the grafted area.

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. (a) A dome-shaped crusted nodule with a cutaneous horn is evident on the forehead. (b) Photomicrograph showing multiple lobular or trabecular proliferation of tumour cells under marked hyperkeratosis (haematoxylin and eosin; original magnification Â 10).

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. At presentation, the leg showed an erythematous plaque surmounted by a few haemorrhagic blisters.

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. Multiple brownish-red papules and nodules are evident on the ear.

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. (a) Erythematous papules are evident close to the metacarpophalangeal joint area of the right index finger. (b) Photomicrograph showing normal epidermis covering oedematous dermis that was occupied by an amorphous substrate (haematoxylin and eosin; original magnification Â 100, inset Â 12´5). (c) Photomicrograph showing alcian blue staining at pH 2´5 (original magnification Â 100). Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjd/article/143/3/671/6691621 by University Of Illinois Library user on 10 March 2023

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. (a) Demarcated, dark-brown, pigmented, slightly atrophic areas of skin are evident on the abdomen, consistent with localized morphoea with a number of xanthomata. (b) Diffuse plane xanthomata of the palms, which caused discomfort and limitation of hand movements.

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. The clinical appearance of the wet left hand with lichenified, fissured eczema of the palm and fingers.

M.M.U.CHOWDHURY R.HEDGES* S.W.LANIGAN Departments of Dermatology and *Surgery, Princess of Wales Hospital, Coity Road, Bridgend CF31 1RQ, U.K.

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. The pedunculated tumour on her lower back. The surface is red or red-black, smooth, and slightly keratotic. (a) Front view of the tumour; (b) side view.

Figure 2 .2Figure 2. The pediculate parts of the tumour. The tumour cells are detected in the subcutis with prominent, ectatic vascularity. (Original magnification Â 8).

Figure 3 .3Figure 3. The characteristics of epithelioid benign fibrous histiocytoma with xanthomatous expression in the centre of the tumour (a) and the fascicular pattern at the periphery of the tumour (b). (Original magnification a and b: Â 66). Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjd/article/143/3/671/6691621 by University Of Illinois Library user on 10 March 2023

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. Roseola-like erythematous macules and spotted dark brown pigmentation seen on the trunk.

G, Cooper MD, Wedgwood RJP. The primary immunodeficiencies. N Engl J Med 1995; 333: 431±40. 2 Schwartz RS. The case of the bare lymphocyte syndrome ± tracking down faulty transcription factors. N Engl J Med 1997; 337: 781±3. 3 De la Salle H, Hanau D, Fricker D et al. Homozygous human TAP peptide transporter mutation in HLA class I deficiency. Science 1994; 265: 237±41. 4 Donato L, de la Salle H, Hanau D et al. Association of HLA class I antigen deficiency related to a TAP2 gene mutation with familial brochiectasis. J Pediatr 1995; 127: 895±900. 5 Furukawa H, Murata S, Yabe T et al. Splice acceptor site mutation of the transporter associated with antigen processing-1 gene in human bare lymphocyte syndrome. J Clin Invest 1999; 103: 755±8. 6 Tourraine JL, Marseglia GL, Betuel H et al. The bare lymhocyte syndrome. Bone Marrow Transplant 1992; 9 (Suppl. 1): 54±6. 7 Maeda H, Hirata R, Chen RF et al. Defective expression of HLA class I antigens: a case of bare lymphocyte syndrome without immunodeficiency. Immunogenetics 1985; 21: 549±58. 8 Watts C, Powis S. Pathways of antigen processing and presentation. Rev Immunogenet 1999; 1: 60±74. 9 Payne R, Brodsky FM, Peterlin BM, Young LM. `Bare lymphocytes' without immunodeficiency. Hum Immunol 1983; 6: 219±27.

Figure 1 .1Figure1. (a) Stimulation of 2 Â 10 6 polymorphonuclear leucocytes (PMN) with N-formyl methionyl leucyl phenylalanine (FMLP) at a concentration of 1 mmol L 21 resulted in a significant induction of superoxide anion release. Prior to FMLP activation absolutely no superoxide anion release was observed. The superoxide anion release was measured for 5 min before and after FMLP stimulation. Data are expressed as mean ^SD. Three independent experiments were performed. (b) Analysis of manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) activity at different time points after addition of either FMLP-activated or control PMN to confluent dermal fibroblast monolayer cultures. Data represent percentage of baseline values of controls, arbitrarily set at 100%. Data derive from a representative experiment, confirmed in three independent experiments. Data are expressed as mean ^SD. As indicated, the P-values of FMLPstimulated cocultures at 1 h and at 3 h relate to significant differences from baseline time 0 (VP , 0´0001, anova). There is a slight induction of MnSOD activity in unstimulated cocultures at 1 h and at 3 h compared with baseline time 0 ( §P 0´0026, anova). Induction in FMLP-stimulated co-cultures compared with unstimulated co-cultures is highly significant at 1 h (*P 0´0001, Student's t-test) and at 3 h (#P 0´0001, Student's t-test).

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. (a) Absence of subcutaneous fat on the exterior side of the right upper limb. (b) On high resolution computed tomography, the right hemithorax is smaller than left hemithorax.

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. (a) Multiple, indurated, slightly reddish plaques on the left cheek, forearms, and trunk. (b) Photomicrograph from a plaque on the back shows diffuse proliferation of lymphoblastic cells. The neoplastic cells are medium sized and show fine chromatin (haematoxylin and eosin, original magnification Â 400).

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. Following treatment with topical PUVA there was healing of all the ulcers and a return to the normal skin texture. (a) Before treatment; (b) after 20 treatments.

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. (a) Erythema and oedema with ruptured bullae are evident on the right antecubital fossa. (b) Photomicrograph showing a typical flame figure (haematoxylin and eosin; original magnification Â 200).

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. Spider-like telangiectasia are widely distributed on the forehead. Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjd/article/143/3/671/6691621 by University Of Illinois Library user on 10 March 2023

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. Penile ultrasound appearance of the normal urethra (a) and of a urethra containing an ovoid lesion (b), consistent with a haemangioma of blue rubber bleb naevus syndrome. Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjd/article/143/3/671/6691621 by University Of Illinois Library user on 10 March 2023

Figure 11Figure1(a). Yellowish-pink papules and nodules are evident on the face. (b). The infiltrate showed histiocytes with abundant vacuolated clear cytoplasm and many multinucleated Touton-like giant cells (haematoxylin and eosin).

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. (a) Purpuric and erythematous oedema is seen on both upper and lower eyelids, especially on the left side. (b) Erythema and telangiectasia are evident over the eyelids and cheeks.

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. Lesions are evident on the back (a) and legs (b) of patient 1. (c) Photomicrograph of biopsy from left thigh of patient 1 showing a subepidermal blister caused by extensive oedema of the papillary dermis, containing neutrophils, eosinophils and lymphocytes. There is a dense infiltrate composed of neutrophils, eosinophils and lymphocytes around the vessels and interstitially in the whole dermis. (d) Microscopic appearance of Pyemotes tritici, adult female. Actual size 250 mm.

Medical Centre Hospital, O È rebro, Sweden E-mail: lars.molin@orebroll.se Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in a patient with pyoderma gangrenosum treated with cyclosporin

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. (a,b) Magnetic resonance imaging showing large masses of unencapsulated adipose tissue (T1) containing areas of different signal (T2).

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. (a) Haemangioma with an unusual distribution over both parietal areas, upper eyelids, the lower lip and midline/left side of neck. (b) Digital subtraction aortagram in right axial oblique projection showing right cervical aortic arch with hypoplasia and narrowing of the aortic isthmus. Note the gross dilatation of the proximal descending aorta and the aberrant origin of the left subclavian artery. (LSCA, left subclavian artery; AOD, descending aorta; RSCA, right subclavian artery; RCA, right carotid artery; LCA, left carotid artery)

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. Case 1 shows the classical epidermal alterations of psoriasis: (a) the architectural pattern of the coincident naevus is severely distorted; and (b) a pagetoid spread of melanocytes is present well above the dermo-epidermal junction. In case 2 (c) an inflammatory infiltrate obscures the naevus cells (the nested pattern at the junction is hardly distinguishible). In the epidermis psoriatic modifications are present. (haematoxylin and eosin, original magnification (a) Â 66; (b) Â 198; (c) Â 66).

Departments of Dermatology and *Pathology, Catholic University School of Medicine, Largo F. Vito, 1, 00168 Rome, Italy Correspondence: Guido Massi, MD E-mail: guidomassi@tiscalinet.it

5Bergbrant IM, Samuelsson L, Olofsson S et al. Polymerase chain reaction for monitoring human papilloma virus contamination of medical personnel during treatment of genital warts with CO 2 laser and electrocoagulation. Acta Derm Venereol (Stockh) 1994; 74: 393±5. 6 Lowy DR, Androphy EJ. Warts. In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine (Freedberg IM, Eisen AZ, Wolff K, et al. eds), 5th edn. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998: 2487±9.

Table 1 .1Reported cases of Paecilomyces spp. infections with cutaneous manifestations Paecilomyces lilacinus. Rev Iberica Micolog 1986; 3 (Suppl.): 229±32. 14 Murciano A, Domer J, Cohen I. Paecilomyces lilacinus infection in an immunocompromised patient. J State Med Soc 1990; 142: 35±7. 15 Cho GY, Choo EH, Choi G et al. Facial cutaneous mycosis by Paecilomyces lilacinus. Korean J Dermatol 1984; 22: 89±93. 16 Harris LF, Dan BM, Lefkowitz LB et al. Paecilomyces cellulitis in a renal transplant patient: successful treatment with intravenous miconazole. South Med J 1979; 72: 897±8. 17 Williamson PR, Kwon-Chung KJ, Gallin JI. Successful treatment of Paecilomyces variotii infection in a patient with chronic granulomatous disease and a review of Paecilomyces species infections. Clin Infect Dis 1992; 14: 1023±6. 18 Naidu J, Singh SM. Hyalohyphomycosis caused by Paecilomyces variotii: a case report, animal pathogenicity and `in vitro' sensitivity. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 1992; 62: 225±30. 19 Cohen-Abbo A, Edwards KM. Multifocal osteomyelitis caused by Paecilomyces variotii in a patient with chronic granulomatous disease. Infection 1995; 23: 55±7.SpeciesClinical featuresHost characteristics

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjd/article/143/3/671/6691621 by University Of Illinois Library user on 10 March 2023 6 de las Heras ME, Perez B, Arrazola JM et al. Self-healing cutaneous mucinosis. Dermatology 1996; 192: 268±70. 7 Pucevich MV, Latour DL, Bale GF et al. Self-healing juvenile cutaneous mucinosis. J Am Acad Dermatol 1984; 11: 327±32. 8 Wadee S, Roode H, Schulz EJ. Self-healing juvenile cutaneous mucinosis in a patient with nephroblastoma. Clin Exp Dermatol 1994; 19: 90±3. 9 Rongioletti F, Ghigliotti G, de Marchi R et al. Cutaneous mucinoses and HIV infection. Br J Dermatol 1998; 139: 1077±80.

357±82. 2 Cacciari E, Cassio A, Balsamo A et al. Long-term follow-up and final height in girls with central precocious puberty treated with luteinizing hormone-releasing analogue nasal spray. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 1994; 148: 1194±9. 3 Goldman JA, Dicker D, Feldberg D et al. A prospective randomized comparison of two gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonists, nafarelin acetate and buserelin acetate. In-Vitro Fertilization-Embryo Transfer. Hum Reprod 1994; 9: 226±8. 4 Abdel-Malek ZA. Endocrine factors as effectors of integumental pigmentation. Dermatol Clin 1988; 6: 175±83.Department of Dermatology,T.KONOOsaka City University Medical School,M.ISHII1-4-3 Asahimachi,S.TANIGUCHI*Abeno-ku,Osaka 545±8585, Japan*Department of Dermatology,Osaka General HospitalWest Japan Railway Company,1-3-5 Tennoji-minami,Abeno-ku,Osaka 545-8585, JapanReferences1 Trabant H, Widdra W, de Looze S. Efficacy and safety of intranasal buserelin acetate in the treatment of endometriosis: a review of six clinical trials and comparison with danazol. Prog Clin Biol Res 1990; 323:

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjd/article/143/3/671/6691621 by University Of Illinois Library user on 10 March 2023 5 Bessis D, Sotto A, Roubert P et al. Endothelin secreting angiosarcoma occurring at the site of an arteriovenous fistula for haemodialysis in a renal transplant recipient. Br J Dermatol 1998; 138: 361±3. 6 Strobbe LJ, Peterse HL, van Tinteren H et al. Angiosarcoma of the breast after conservation therapy for invasive cancer, incidence and outcome. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1998; 47: 101±9.7 Kim MK, Huh SJ, Kim DY et al. Secondary angiosarcoma followingirradiation ± case report and review of the literature. Radiat Med1998; 16: 55±60.8 Dutton JJ. Botulinum-A toxin in the treatment of craniofacialmuscle spasms: short and long term, local and systemic effects. SurvOphthalmol 1996; 41: 51±65.*Department of Dermato-Venereology,Â RPA Â TI*Semmelweis Medical University,S.DE Â SAKNAI*Ma Âria u. 41,M.DE Â SAKNAI*1085 Budapest, HungaryJ.BI Â RO Â *²National Institute of Dermato-Venerology,K.NAGY²Budapest, HungaryA.HORVA Â TH*²E-mail: karsar@bor.sote.huReferences1 Gyulai R, Keme Âny L, Kiss M et al. Human herpesvirus 8 DNAsequences in angiosarcoma of the face (letter). Br J Dermatol 1997;137: 467.2 Martinez-Escribano JA, del Pino Gil-Mateo M, Miquel J et al. Humanherpesvirus 8 is not detectable by polymerase chain reaction inangiosarcoma (letter). Br J Dermatol 1998; 138: 546±7.3 Nagy K, Horva Âth A, Medveczky M et al. Human herpes virus 8 DNAin visceral Kaposi's sarcoma of AIDS and other immunocom-promised patients in Hungary. Cancer Contr 1997; 4: 60±4.4 Pfrommer C, Tebbe B, Tidona CA et al. Progressive HHV-8-positiveclassic Kaposi's sarcoma: rapid response to interferon alfa-2b butpersistence of HHV-8 DNA sequences in lesional skin. Br J Dermatol1998; 139: 516±19.Figure 1. (a) Livid, non-pitting oedema is evident on the face, withright-sided predominance. Due to blepharospasm, only the left eyecan be partially opened. (b) Detection of human herpesvirus type 8DNA by polymerase chain reaction in the facial skin lesion. Lane 1,positive control (DNA from classic Kaposi's sarcoma); lane 2, empty; lane 3, DNA from angiosarcoma (10 mL); lane 4, DNA from angiosarcoma (2 mL); lane 5, DNA from peripheral lymphocytes; m, molecular marker. (c) Photomicrograph showing irregular, narrow vessels with polymorphic endothelial nuclei, consistent with welldifferentiated angiosarcoma (haematoxylin and eosin).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjd/article/143/3/671/6691621 by University Of Illinois Library user on 10 March 2023 References 1 Sheibani K, Winberg CD, Burke JS et al. Lymphoblastic lymphoma expressing natural killer cell-associated antigens: a clinicopathological study of six cases. Leuk Res 1987; 11: 371±7.2 Koita H, Suzumiya J, Ohshima K et al. Lymphoblastic lymphomaexpressing natural killer cell phenotype with involvement of themediastinum and nasal cavity. Am J Surg Pathol 1997; 21: 242±8.3 Nakamura S, Suchi T, Koshikawa T et al. Clinicopathologic study ofCD56 (NCAM) -positive angiocentric lymphoma occurring in sitesother than the upper and lower respiratory tract. Am J Surg Pathol1995; 19: 284±96.4 Nakamura S, Yatabe Y, Koshikawa T et al. Lymphoblasticlymphoma expressing CD56 and TdT. Am J Surg Pathol 1998; 22:135±7.5 Lanier LL, Spits H, Phillips JH. The developmental relationshipbetween NK cells and T cells. Immunol Today 1992; 13: 392±5.6 Sa Ânchez MJ, Muench MO, Roncarolo MG et al. Identification ofa common T/Natural killer cell progenitor in human fetal thymus.J Exp Med 1994; 180: 569±76.7 Kawano S, Tatsumi E, Yoneda N et al. Novel leukemic lymphomawith probable derivation from immature stage of natural killer (NK)lineage in an aged patient. Haematol Oncol 1995; 13: 1±11.

Table 1 .1Documented cases of NLYearAuthorsAgeSexDiabetesSiteCause1978Sahl et al. 228FYesAbdomenAppendicectomy1990Miller et al. 330FYesLegCholecystectomy1990Llajam et al. 435MYesLegBurn scar1991Schumacher et al. 552MNoLegOrthopaedic operation1993Gebauer et al. 159MYesLegVaricose vein operation1997 1999Vion et al. 6 Ghate et al. 730 58F FNo YesLeg ArmPhlebectomy Radial artery harvestDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjd/article/143/3/671/6691621 by University Of Illinois Library user on 10 March 2023q 2000 British Association of Dermatologists, British Journal of Dermatology, 143, 645±690

Large bullous lesions containing light serous liquid, and profound swelling of the legs may be seen. Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjd/article/143/3/671/6691621 by University Of Illinois Library user on 10 March 2023 7 Simon H-U, Plotz SG, Dummer R et al. Abnormal clones of T cells producing interleukin-5 in idiopathic eosinophilia. N Engl J Med 1999; 341: 1112±20. 8 Rafeul A. Chemokines in allergic inflammation. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1997; 99: 273±7.Figure 1.Clinic of Dermatology andA.OFFIDANI*Institute of Pathology,M.L.BERNARDINIUniversity of Ancona,O.SIMONETTIOspedale Umberto I,C.SIMONCINIPiazza Cappelli 1,M.GIANGIACOMI*60121 Ancona, ItalyG.BOSSI

oup.com/bjd/article/143/3/671/6691621 by University Of Illinois Library user on 10 March 2023 2 Moodley M, Ramdial P. Blue rubber bleb naevus syndrome: case report and review of the literature. Pediatrics 1993; 92: 160±2. 3 Dieckmann K, Maurage C, Faure N et al. Combined laser-steroid therapy in blue rubber bleb nevus syndrome: case report and review of the literature. Eur J Pediatr Surg 1994; 4: 372±4. 4 Fernandes C, Silva A, Coelho A et al. Blue rubber bleb naevus: case report and literature review. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 1999; 11: 455±7. 5 Radke M, Waldschmidt J, Stolpe HJ et al. Blue rubber-bleb±nevus syndrome with predominant urinary bladder hemangiomatosis. Eur J Pediatr Surg 1993; 3: 313±6.

Figure 1. Chest X-ray showing bilateral alveolar shadowing sparing the apices, with a ground glass appearance typical of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia. Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjd/article/143/3/671/6691621 by University Of Illinois Library user on 10 March 2023 symmetrical pain and weakness in all four extremities, especially in the lower limbs. In the absence of signs during physical examination, peripheral neuropathy was diagnosed based on nerve conduction studies that showed slight reduction of the sensory conduction velocities (right cubital 39´5 ms 21 , normal values . 44 ms 21 ; right tibialis posterior 22 ms 21 ; normal values . 35 ms 21 ) and motor conduction velocities (right cubital 47´9 ms 21 , normal values . 50 ms 21 ; right tibialis posterior 37 ms 21 , normal values . 41 ms 21 ) as well as slight increases of latencies (right cubital 3´84 ms 21 , normal value , 3´10 ms 21 ; right tibialis posterior 8´16 ms 21 , normal values , 6´5 ms 21 ). Investigations included a complete blood count, liver and renal function tests, fasting plasma glucose, uric acid, total cholesterol, muscle enzymes, antinuclear, antimitochondrial and anti smooth muscle antibodies, serum protein electrophoresis, B12 and folic acid serum levels, rheumatoid factor, cryoglobulins, C reactive protein, hepatitis B and C, HIV, Epstein±Barr and CMV serologic studies, serum thyroid and adrenal hormones, urine tests, thorax radiology, sputum culture and cytology, bronchoscopy with cultures and cytology of the bronchoaspirate and bronchoalveolar lavage, barium meal and oesophagogastroduodenoscopy, thoracoabdominal CT scan, and study of biopsy samples from skin, muscle and nerve. No aetiology was found.

Sherrington CA, Sim DKY, Freezer NJ et al. Subglottic haemangioma. Arch Dis Childhood 1997; 76: 458±9. 2 Narcy P, Lacau Saint-Gully J, Manac'h Y et al. Traitment des angiomes sous-glottiques du nourisson: a propos de 32 observations. Ann Pediatr 1981; 28: 721±5. 3 Vaillant L, Lorette G, Chantepie A et al. Multiple cutaneous haemangiomas and coarctation of the aorta with right aortic arch. Pediatrics 1988; 81: 707±10. 4 Hijii T, Fukushige J, Tasaki K et al. Interferon alpha therapy for multiple haemangiomas associated with coarctation of the aorta. Heart Vessels 1996; 11: 211±4. 5 Honey M, Lincoln JCR, Osborne MP et al. Coarctation of the aorta with right aortic arch. Report of surgical correction in 2 cases with associated anomalous origin of the left circumflex coronary artery from the right pulmonary artery. Br Heart J 1975; 37: 937±45. 6 Pascual-Castroviejo I, Viano J, Moreno F et al. Hemangiomas of the head, neck and chest with associated vascular and brain anomalies: a complex neurocutaneous syndrome. Am J Neuroradiol 1996; 17: 461±71. 7 Schneewiess A, Bleiden L, ShemTov A et al. Coarctation of the aorta with congenital hemangioma of the face and neck and aneurysm or dilatation of subclavian or inominate artery: a new syndrome?. Chest 1982; 82: 186±7. 8 Rudolph AM, Heymann AM, Spitsnas U. Hemodynamic considerations in the development of narrowing of the aorta. Am J Cardiol 1972; 30: 514±25. 9 Elzenga NJ, Gittenberger-d, e-Groot AG. Localised coarctation of the aorta. An age dependent spectrum. Br Heart J 1983; 49: 317±23. 10 Patel SD, Cohen BA, Kan JS. Extensive facial hemangiomas with cardiac and abdominal anomalies. J Am Acad Dermatol 1997; 36: 636±8.Departments of Dermatology and Cardiology*,R.YATES*Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children,S.SYEDLondon WC1N 3JHV.TSANG*Correspondence: Dr J.I.HarperJ.I.HARPERReferences1

Table 1 .1Right-sided aortic arch with coarctation and head and neck haemangiomas Coarctation of aorta; LCCA, left common carotid artery; RCCA, right common carotid artery; RSA, right subclavian artery; LSA, left subclavian artery; AAO, ascending aorta; DAO, descending aorta. Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjd/article/143/3/671/6691621 by University Of Illinois Library user on 10 March 2023Site ofBranchingPatternAirwayAuthorNo of patientsaortic archproximal to CoAdistal to CoAOperationinvolvementHoney et al 51NormalLCCA,RCCA, RSALSAAngioplastic repair using LSANot reportedVaillant et al 31CervicalLCCA,RCCA, RSALSAAortoplasty using RSALaryngealPatel et al 101CervicalLCCA, RCCA,RSALSANot statedSupraglotticThis case report1CervicalLCCA, RCCA, RSALSAAAO TO DAO Goretex tubeSubglotticCOA,

