Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 colocalizes with phosphorylated tau in human inclusion-body myositis paired-helical ®laments and may play a role in tau phosphorylation

To investigate the possible role of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (cdk5) in the formation of paired helical ®laments (PHFs) in muscle of patients with inclusion-body myositis (IBM), we immunolocalized cdk5, by light-and electron-microscopy, in muscle biopsies of six IBM patients. Approximately 80±90% of IBM vacuolated muscle ®bers, and 10±15% of nonvacuolated ®bers, contained well de®ned cdk5-immunoreactive inclusions that colocalized with phosphorylated tau in 70±80% of those ®bers. Immunoelectronmicroscopy revealed the association of cdk5 with tau-immunoreactive PHFs. In all biopsies that contained them, regenerating muscle ®bers had diffuse, moderate to strong cdk5 immunoreactivity. At all neuromuscular junctions, there was strong cdk5 immunoreactivity postsynaptically. Our study suggests that cdk5: (1) plays a role in IBM pathogenesis, possibly mediating phosphorylation of PHF-related tau; (2) is involved in muscle regeneration; and (3) has a novel function at normal neuromuscular junctions.

Cyclin-dependent protein kinase 5 (cdk5) belongs to a family of structurally related cyclin-dependent protein kinases that are mainly involved in cell-division (reviewed in [8,10]). Cdk5 is expressed in both dividing and non-dividing cells, and also has functions unrelated to the cell-cycle [8,10].

Cdk5 is present in most human tissues, including skeletal muscle, but its expression in neurons is considerably higher than in other cells [8,10]. Moreover, all known cdk5 activators (p35, p39, p67) have been considered neuron-speci®c [8,10]. Accordingly, cdk5 has been studied most extensively in neurons, where it phosphorylates cytoskeletal and synaptic proteins [8,10].

In Alzheimer disease (AD) brain, cdk5 is considered to play a role in abnormal tau phosphorylation. For example, (a) immunocytochemically, both cdk5 [16,19] and cdk5 activator p25 (a proteolytic fragment of activator p35) [15] immunocolocalize with epitopes of phosphorylated tau on neuro®brillary tangles (NFTs), which ultrastructu-rally are composed of paired helical ®laments; (b) biochemically, total cdk5 activity is increased in AD brain [15]; and (c) in vitro, cdk5 phosphorylates tau on several epitopes that are phosphorylated in AD tau [4]. In cultured neurons, oxidative stress and extracellular amyloid b (Ab) induce cdk5 activity, which leads to tau hyperphosphorylation and cell death [9].

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (IBM) is the most common muscle disease of older persons leading to severe disability (reviewed in [1]). The muscle-biopsy features of IBM are vacuolar degeneration of muscle ®bers, intramuscle-®ber congophilia, and various degrees of lymphocytic in¯ammation. An intriguing aspect is that the pathological phenotype of muscle in IBM has many similarities to that of AD brain [1]. Those include: (1) intra-muscle-®ber clusters (tangles) of paired helical ®laments (PHFs) containing phosphorylated tau [12], and (2) abnormal accumulations within muscle ®bers of at least 12 proteins [1] for example, (a) amyloid-b precursor protein (AbPP), including its epitope Ab [2], (b) apolipoprotein E [1], (c) ubiquitin [1], and (d) presenilin-1 [3]. Also similarly to AD brain [11],

IBM abnormal muscle ®bers express markers of oxidative stress [1].

Unknown in both IBM and AD are the factors leading to the abnormal accumulation of various proteins in the respective tissues, including the yet unidenti®ed molecular pathway responsible for PHF formation.

To determine whether cdk5 may play a role in IBM tau phosphorylation, we immunocolocalized cdk5 and phosphorylated tau, by both light-and electron-microscopy.

Light-microscopic immunocytochemistry was performed on 10 mm-thick sections of freshly frozen diagnostic muscle biopsies from six IBM patients, according to our established techniques [2,3,12,18]. Seventeen control muscle biopsies included: three dermatomyositis, two polymyositis, two morphologically non-speci®c myopathy, three amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, two chronic peripheral neuropathy, one non-IBM vacuolar myopathy, one mitochondrial myopathy, and three normal muscle. Diagnosis was based on clinical and laboratory studies, including 18-reaction histochemistry of the muscle biopsy.

We used a speci®c rabbit polyclonal antibody against the carboxy-terminal epitope of human cdk5 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc., Santa Cruz, CA), diluted 1:20±1:50. Double immunolocalization studies utilized rabbit polyclonal antibody against cdk5 in combination with one of the following: (1) mouse monoclonal antibody AT8 (Innogenetics, Alharetta, GA); (2) mouse monoclonal antibody PHF-1 (gift from Dr Peter Davies) (AT8 recognizes doubly phosphorylated tau epitope, p-Ser202/p-Thr205 [6], and PHF-1 recognizes p-Ser396/p-Ser404 [14], according to the sequence of the longest human tau isoform, in both AD brain and IBM muscle [6,12,14]); (3) mouse monoclonal antibody against desmin (Chemicon, Temecula, CA), which identi®es regenerating (positive) and necrotic (negative) muscle ®bers; (4) a-bungarotoxin (a-BT), which binds to the postsynaptic nicotinic acetylcholine receptors at neuromuscular junctions (NMJs), conjugated to the ¯uorescent marker Alexa (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR).

To block non-speci®c binding of antibodies to Fc receptors, sections were preincubated with normal goat serum diluted 1:10. Controls for staining speci®city were: (1) omission of the primary antibody, or (2) its replacement with a non-immune serum or irrelevant antibodies, as described [2,3,12,18].

Immuno-electronmicroscopy (immuno-EM) was performed as described previously [2,3,12,18]. cdk5 was immunolocalized with either horse-radish peroxidase (HRP)-, or 5-or 10-nm gold-conjugated secondary antibody. Doubleimmuno-EM utilized polyclonal anti-cdk5 antibody combined with either AT8 or PHF-1 monoclonal antibody, using appropriate secondary antibodies conjugated to 10 or 5 nm gold particles.

By light-microscopy, in all IBM biopsies, 80±90% of the vacuolated muscle ®bers and 10±15% of the non-vacuolated ®bers had strong cdk5 immunoreactivity (IR) in the form of numerous well-de®ned squiggly, linear or dotty inclusions (Fig. 1A,D). Some muscle ®bers, in addition to the immunoreactive inclusions, had a slight-to-moderate diffuse cytoplasmic cdk5-IR.

In 70±80% of muscle ®bers bearing cdk5-immunoreactive inclusions, cdk5-IR closely colocalized with AT8 or PHF-1 immunoreactivities (each indicating phosphorylated tau, Fig. 1A±F). In some muscle ®bers, cdk5-IR was more abundant than AT8-or PHF-1-IR.

By immuno-EM, cdk5 localized to the clusters of PHFs. When HRP-labeled secondary antibody was used, the reaction-product overlaid PHFs entirely (Fig. 2A). Gold-immunolabeling revealed that cdk5 was very closely associated with tau-immunoreactive PHFs (Fig. 2B±D).

In all myopathies, regenerating muscle ®bers had diffuse, moderate-to-strong cdk5-IR.

In all biopsies, by light-microscopy cdk5 was present at the postsynaptic domain of the NMJs, where it colocalized with bound a-bungarotoxin (Fig. 3A,B). However, at most of the NMJs cdk5 occupied a slightly larger territory than the bound a-BT. Myonuclei and intra-muscular nerve twigs were not stained in any muscle biopsies.

When primary antibody was omitted or replaced with non-immune serum or irrelevant antibodies, the abovedescribed immunoreactions did not take place.

One of the most prominent features of IBM is the accumulation of PHFs containing phosphorylated tau [1]. We have previously shown, both by immunocytochemistry and Western blot, that IBM tau is phosphorylated at the same sites as is AD tau [12].

Our present study demonstrates for the ®rst time that cdk5 is associated with IBM PHFs where it colocalizes with phosphorylated tau. The epitopes of tau phosphorylated by cdk5 in vitro are the same phosphoepitopes recognized by the AT8 and PHF-1 antibodies [4,6,14] that we used to colocalize cdk5 with phosphorylated tau, by light-microscopy and gold immuno-electronmicroscopy. Our close colocalization of these tau phosphoepitopes with cdk5 on IBM PHFs strongly suggests that, in IBM, tau protein is indeed a substrate for cdk5 phosphorylation (the existence of other cdk5 substrates on IBM PHFs is possible). Since in some ®bers cdk5-IR was more abundant than phosphorylated tau-IR, cdk5 expression, accumulation, and activity may precede IBM-PHF formation. If so, activation of cdk5 in IBM may be an antecedent cause of tau-hyperphosphorylation leading to PHF formation. Accumulation of cdk5 in IBM vacuolated muscle ®bers was recently reported, but a speci®c subcellular site of its accumulation was not identi-®ed [13].

We propose that cdk5 overexpression and activation in IBM may result from oxidative stress and/or Ab accumulation. These factors have been recently shown to activate cdk5 in neurons [9]. It was suggested that reactive oxygen species and/or Ab induce a proteolytic cleavage of p35, a physiological neuronal cdk5 activator, to its p25 and p10 fragments [9]. The p25 fragment is able to (a) increase cdk5 activity and (b) cause cdk5 to dissociate from cell membranes and accumulate in cytoplasm [9,15]. Both mechanisms can, in turn, promote abnormal tau phosphorylation. A similar scenario could operate in abnormal IBM muscle ®bers; however, a muscle-speci®c activator of cdk5 has not yet been identi®ed. Therefore, the exact pathogenic cascade leading to cdk5 accumulation and activation in IBM remains unknown.

In AD brain, tau phosphorylation and PHF formation may result from a concerted action of several protein kinases in addition to cdk5, including extracellular-signal regulated protein kinase (ERK) [17], glycogen synthase kinase 3b [19], and casein kinase-1 [5]. The exact mechanisms of their activation are not known, although oxidative stress has been proposed to play a role [17].

We have recently demonstrated that ERK, a proposed link from oxidative stress to tau phosphorylation [17], is associated with IBM PHFs [18]. Therefore, ERK may participate in IBM tau phosphorylation. Cdk5 is now the second kinase postulated to play a role in IBM tau phosphorylation. Whether cdk5 plays other roles in IBM pathogenesis, for  example through the phosphorylation of other proteins accumulated in IBM ®bers, is not known.

The presence of increased cdk5-IR in regenerating muscle ®bers is consistent with its reported involvement in mammalian muscle differentiation in culture [7].

Previously, cdk5 has been implicated in the regulation of synaptic function of neurons [8,10]. Our novel immunolocalization of cdk5 at the postsynaptic domain of human NMJs may re¯ect its phosphorylative role in nerve-muscle signal-transduction or trophic interaction, including phosphorylation of second and subsequent messengers. Supported in parts by grants from the National Institutes of Health (AG16768), and the Muscular Dystrophy Association (to V.A.). We are grateful to Dr Peter Davies for the generous gift of PHF-1 antibody. Maggie Baburyan provided excellent technical assistance in electronmicroscopy.

Fig. 1 .1Fig. 1. (A±F) Light microscopic double immunostaining on the same section of IBM abnormal muscle ®bers. Cdk5 (A) plus PHF-1 (B), double exposure (C); cdk5 (D) plus AT8 (E), double exposure (F). (£1400). There is co-localization of cdk5 with PHF-1 and of cdk5 with AT8.

Fig. 3 .3Fig. 3. (A,B) Two normal neuromuscular junctions. (A) cdk5; (B) a-bungarotoxin (a-BT) bound to the postsynaptic nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. There is a colocalization between cdk5 and a-BT, except that cdk5 occupies larger territory than a-BT in the junction on the upper right. (£1600).

Fig. 2 .2Fig. 2. (A±D) Immuno-electronmicroscopy. (A) cdk5. Horseradish peroxidase reaction demonstrating dark reaction product covering PHFs entirely, whereas adjacent portion of the myo®ber (to the right) is not immunostained. £21 600. (B) cdk5. Single immunogold labeling; 5 nm gold particles label PHFs. £77 500. (C,D) Double immunogold labeling. In (C) cdk5 is identi®ed by 5 nm gold and PHF-1 by 10 nm gold. Both cdk5 and PHF-1 label PHFs. £68,000. In (D) cdk5 is identi®ed by 10 nm gold and AT8 by 5 nm gold. Both cdk5 and AT8 label PHFs. £82 000. Bars represent 0.5 mm, in (A) and 0.1 mm in (B,C,D).

