Inclusion Body Myositis

Introduction

The three major categories of idiopathic inflammatory myopathy are dermatomyositis, polymyositis, and inclusion body myositis. These inflammatory myopathies are clinically, histologically, and pathogenetically distinct [1••,2,3,4••]. Although sporadic IBM is probably the most common inflammatory myopathy in patients older than 50 years of age, it is frequently misdiagnosed. Accurate diagnosis is important because of the three common idiopathic inflammatory myopathies, IBM is the least likely to improve with immunosuppressive therapy.

Sporadic IBM presents with an insidious onset of slowly progressive proximal and distal weakness. The slow evolution of the disease process probably accounts in part for the delay in diagnosis, averaging approximately 6 years from the onset of symptoms [5•,Class III]. Patients with IBM have a unique pattern of weakness, with early weakness and atrophy of the quadriceps, the volar forearm muscles (ie, wrist and finger flexors), and the ankle dorsiflexors. The quadriceps weakness can produce a genu recurvatum or back knee and lead to accelerated degenerative knee arthritis and pain. In addition, muscle involvement in IBM is often asymmetric. As many as 40% of patients complain of dysphagia, which can be so severe that some require cricopharyneal myotomy [6,7]. Although most patients have no sensory symptoms, evidence of generalized peripheral neuropathy can be detected in up to 30% of patients on clinical examination and electrophysiologic testing [5•,Class III].

The serum creatine kinase level is normal or only mildly elevated. Electromyography demonstrates increased insertional and spontaneous activity with both small and large polyphasic motor unit potentials and early recruitment. Muscle biopsy specimens characteristically demonstrate endomysial inflammation and fibers with one or more rimmed vacuoles. Amyloid deposition is evident on Congo red staining using polarized light or fluorescence techniques [8•]. Electron microscopy demonstrates 15-to 21-nm cytoplasmic and intranuclear tubulofilaments.

The pathogenesis of IBM is unknown; it may be a primary inflammatory myopathy like dermatomyositis and polymyositis. The poor clinical response to various immunosuppressive therapies argues against a primary autoimmune basis for IBM [9]. Askanas et al. [3] have

Opinion statement

Inclusion body myositis (IBM) is usually refractory to immunosuppressive therapy; however, a few reports suggest that a minority of patients with IBM may have a partial, transient response or that therapy may slow progression. Therefore, although we generally discourage the use of immunosuppressive therapy for IBM, if the patient is willing to accept the potential side effects of therapy, a 3-to 6-month trial of oral prednisone can be attempted: 100 mg/d for 2 to 4 weeks, then 100 mg every other day for 2 to 3 months. If prednisone alone produces no improvement after 3 months, oral methotrexate can be added: 10 to 15 mg/wk for 6 to 12 months. If there is no objective clinical improvement in strength after a trial of prednisone alone or prednisone plus methotrexate over the course of 6 to 12 months, we discontinue pharmacologic therapy. Because of the great expense, relative lack of availability, and minimal evidence of benefit of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), we do not recommend this form of immunomodulating therapy for IBM.

documented the accumulation of "Alzheimer-characteristic proteins" in vacuolated muscle fibers in IBM, supporting the possibility that IBM may be a primary degenerative myopathy.

Life expectancy does not appear to be significantly altered. Most patients remain ambulatory, although they frequently require or at least benefit from a cane or a wheelchair for walking long distances. Some patients become severely incapacitated, however, and require a wheelchair within 10 to 15 years.

Unfortunately, patients with IBM do not significantly improve with immunosuppressive treatment. A number of anecdotal reports of small numbers of cases found no sustained benefit with corticosteroid therapy [9-15, Class III]. In our initial study of eight patients [9, Class III], the prednisone dose was 100 mg/d for 4 weeks, followed by 100 mg every other day for at least 6 months. Despite lower serum creatine kinase levels and reduced inflammation demonstrated on posttreatment muscle biopsies, none of the patients improved in strength or function. Interestingly, the number of vacuolated muscle fibers and fibers with amyloid deposition was increased in the follow-up biopsies, suggesting that the accumulation of vacuoles and amyloid may have a role in the pathogenesis of IBM. In our subsequent retrospective study of 11 definite and 7 possible (characteristic phenotype/nondiagnostic biopsy results) patients with IBM, none responded to corticosteroids [5•, Class III].

A few retrospective unblinded studies have reported mild or transient improvement for an occasional patient with IBM treated with prednisone. Some groups have downplayed the rare patients who appear to experience a transient benefit and point out that all patients ultimately worsen [15, Class III], whereas other researchers emphasize the potential benefit of prednisone therapy [14,16,Class III]. In two publications, a group of researchers has reported that 40% to 58% of their patients with IBM partially responded to prednisone, although none had a complete remission [16,17,Class III]. In these two retrospective unblinded studies, however, a positive response could include subjective improvement or lower serum creatine kinase levels following treatment.

The use of cytotoxic agents for IBM has also generally been disappointing. Nearly all these reports are retrospective and uncontrolled, and patients receiving cytotoxic agents were often included in the results of the corticosteroid trials noted previously [5•,13-16, Class III]. In a retrospective data analysis, Joffe et al. [16,Class III] reported that 4 of 10 patients (40%) had a partial response to low-dose methotrexate (5 mg/wk) in addition to prednisone. The same group conducted a small (11 patients) unblinded prospective crossover study comparing prednisone plus azathioprine plus oral methotrexate with prednisone plus intravenous methotrexate [17,Class II]. They found no clinically significant improvement in strength. Serum creatine kinase levels decreased in 66% to 70% of patients, however, and there was no decline in strength over the 6-month treatment period in approximately half the patients in both study arms. They concluded that the combination of immunosuppressive medications stabilized the disease process. The best study to date suggesting that there may be a benefit to treating some patients with immunosuppressive drugs is the retrospective nonrandomized but controlled study done by Sayers et al. [18,Class II]. In this study, four nontreated patients were compared with 13 patients receiving prednisone alone and 15 patients receiving a combination of prednisone plus another immunosuppressive agent (oral methotrexate, azathioprine, or cyclosporine). All four untreated patients deteriorated. Of the patients treated with prednisone alone, seven (54%) deteriorated, four (31%) stabilized, and two (15%) experienced transient improvement. Of the group receiving prednisone plus another immunosuppressive drug, six (40%) deteriorated, one (6%) stabilized, five (33%) had transient improvement, and three (20%) had long-term improvement. The primary criticism of this report is that deterioration, stabilization, and improvement were all based on nonquantitative global impressions of the patient and physician.

Regarding other immunosuppressive treatment approaches, Cronin et al. [19,Class III] reported no response to intravenous cyclophosphamide in two patients. Dau [20, Class III] reported a partial nonmaintained response to leukocytopheresis in one patient. Jongen et al. [21, Class III] reported on a case in which oral chlorambucil produced partial improvement followed by stabilization over 15 months. Of four patients with IBM treated with total-body irradiation, three continued to deteriorate; one patient had a subjective transient improvement but then deteriorated [22, Class III].

There have been three published studies of the use of intravenous immunoglobulin for IBM. The initial uncontrolled study suggested a benefit in three of four patients [23,Class III]. We were unable to document any significant clinical improvement in nine patients treated with IVIG using induction doses of 2 gm/kg followed by monthly maintenance infusions of 1 gm/kg [24, Class III]. These two unblinded trials led to a prospective double-blind placebo-controlled study [25•, Class I]. Nineteen patients were entered into this study-nine randomized to receive IVIG and 10 receiving placebo. Although the patients who received IVIG had a slightly higher combined manual muscle score compared with the group receiving placebo, this did not reach statistical significance. Two secondary efficacy measurements-quantitative swallowing function measured by ultrasonography and a lower extremity "limb-by-limb" manual muscle score subanalysis-did show statistically significant improvement with IVIG therapy. Nevertheless, this is the only double-blind controlled prospective therapeutic trial for IBM, and it ultimately has to be considered a negative study [26].

Treatment

• There is no convincing evidence from either noncontrolled or controlled reports that immunosuppressive or immunomodulating therapy produces significant improvement in patients with IBM. A minority of patients may experience a transient improvement in strength or possibly a stabilization or slowing of deterioration. All patients ultimately worsen despite therapy, however. If the patient is informed of the potential risks of immunosuppressive therapy, an empiric trial can be attempted for a defined period of time to determine if the patient is among the minority who may obtain partial benefit. It is acceptable to inform the patient that because IBM usually does not respond to therapy, it is reasonable not to attempt to treat it with these agents. • If an empiric trial is initiated, the first-line therapy is prednisone.

We recommend that the second-line therapy should be the addition of oral methotrexate to prednisone. Either it may take too long to detect an effect with other chemotherapeutic options (eg, with azathioprine) or there are insufficient data to support an empiric trial (eg, cyclosporine, cyclophosphamide, chlorambucil). Regarding the use of IVIG as an immunomodulating agent, we inform patients that because of the great expense of the drug, its relative shortage, and no clear indication of the drug's effectiveness for IBM, we do not recommend a therapeutic trial of IVIG for this disease.

If there is no objective benefit to prednisone or prednisone plus methotrexate, we taper the patient off drug therapy.

Corticosteroids

Standard dosage 100 mg/d in a single morning dose for 2 to 4 weeks. After 2 to 4 weeks, the patient can be immediately switched to 100 mg every other day. Some clinicians prefer to taper the dose to 100 mg every other day over a period of weeks. Continue prednisone at a dose of 100 mg every other day for 2 to 3 months, carefully recording the patient's muscle strength in the arms and legs at monthly visits. At that point, a determination is made whether there has been an objective improvement in strength. If there has been no improvement in strength, the prednisone can be tapered and discontinued quickly over approximately 2 months. Alternatively, a second immunosuppressive drug can be added to the regimen (usually methotrexate), and the prednisone can be tapered at a slower rate, usually 5 mg every 2 weeks. Contraindications There are no absolute contraindications. Relative contraindications include diabetes mellitus, hypertension, glaucoma, history of mania or bipolar disorder, and osteoporosis. Main drug interactions None.

Main side effects Fluid and weight gain, hypertension, hyperglycemia, hypokalemia, cataracts, glaucoma, gastric irritation, osteoporosis, infection, aseptic femoral necrosis. Special points A chest x-ray and purified protein derivative skin test are obtained before initiating therapy. Calcium supplementation (1 gm/d) and vitamin D are prescribed to prevent osteoporosis. Estrogen supplements are given to postmenopausal woman. Oral bisphosphonates are prescribed for patients with known osteoporosis and for postmenopausal women. There is evidence that oral bisphosphonates are efficacious in preventing osteoporosis in patients taking prednisone [27]. Bone marrow density is measured annually while patients are taking prednisone. Medication for peptic ulcers or gastritis and hypokalemia is prescribed only if clinically indicated. Fasting blood sugar level, serum potassium level, blood pressure, and weight are checked at each clinic visit, and periodic ophthalmologic evaluations are necessary to check for the development of cataracts and glaucoma. Cost/cost effectiveness Generic prednisone is available and is cost effective (less than $20 monthly). 

Pharmacologic treatment

Cricopharyngeal myotomy

Standard procedure Cricopharyngeal myotomy. Contraindications None.

Complications Hemorrhage. This is a relatively simple, low-complication procedure performed by an otolaryngologist. Cost/cost effectiveness The procedure is probably cost effective for patients with severe dysphagia who are aspirating and experiencing progressive weight loss. It is infrequent to have to resort to this surgical procedure in the majority of patients with IBM, however.

• If IBM is not a primary autoimmune inflammatory myopathy, it is unlikely that immunosuppressive agents will improve strength or function. Slowing the rate of deterioration or stabilizing strength may be the goal. Treating IBM with immunosuppressive drugs may therefore be analogous to treating Duchenne muscular dystrophy with prednisone [28, Class I]. • If the goal in IBM is to slow or prevent disease progression, different trial designs need to be adopted. Given the slow rate of deterioration of most patients, placebo-controlled trials using standard immunosuppressive drugs will most likely need to be 12 or 24 months in length and will require 25 to 30 patients in each arm. Such an effort would necessitate a large multicenter study. The primary efficacy measurement should be quantitative strength assessment by means of maximum voluntary isometric contraction performed by a physical therapist who is unaware of the treatment status of the patient. • Novel drug therapy can be attempted first in smaller open-label studies to determine if the drug can produce significant improvement. For the reasons cited previously, this type of dramatic improvement is unlikely to occur. Currently, there is a small open-label multicenter pilot study underway using beta-interferon for IBM.

Surgery

Emerging therapies

MethotrexateStandard dosage Oral methotrexate is administered one day a week. Begin at a total dose of 7.5 mg and increase by one 2.5-mg tablet weekly to a dose of 15 mg/wk. Methotrexate can be given as a single dose, or, if there is gastrointestinal discomfort, it can be given in three divided doses 12 hours apart. If doses of more than 20 mg/wk are desired, parenteral (intravenous or intramuscular) administration is used. Methotrexate is available in a generic form. The average monthly cost is $90 to $100.• A few patients with severe dysphagia due to cricopharyngeus muscle dysfunction have benefited from cricopharyngeus muscle myotomy [6,7, Class III].Contraindications There are no absolute contraindications. Relative contraindications includeunderlying pulmonary or hepatic disease.Main drug interactions None.Main side effects Pulmonary fibrosis, hepatotoxicity, infection, infertility, leukopenia, infection,alopecia, gastric irritation, stomatitis, teratogenicity, neoplasia.Special points Monthly liver enzyme testing (including gamma-glutamyltransferase) and bloodcount must be done.Cost/cost effectiveness

