

Introduction

Idiopathic in¯ammatory myopathies (IIM) such as dermatomyositis (DM) and polymyositis (PM) are of major interest for the neurologist due to effective treatment. Nevertheless, there is an important proportion of patients who do not respond to some kind of treatment. Especially in patients with inclusion body myositis (IBM) treatment seems to be only partly effective in some and ineffective in most.

New therapeutic regimens such as intravenous immunoglobulin treatment and a combination of cytotoxic drugs with corticosteroids have been added during past years. Nevertheless, most of the therapeutic approaches in in¯ammatory myopathies are based on the personal experience of the specialist. Controlled studies are rare and suffer from major methodological shortcomings.

The aim of the workshop was to update the knowledge concerning in¯ammatory myopathies and to establish diagnostic criteria for DM, PM and IBM, which can be applied for future therapeutic studies.

Pathophysiology

N. Goebels (Munich, Germany) described the molecular immunopathogenesis of in¯ammatory myopathies. He stressed the different immune mechanisms involved in DM, PM and IBM. In DM muscle ®ber damage is secondary to an immune response directed against the vascular endothelium. In PM there is a direct invasion of CD81 T-cells into initially non-necrotic muscle ®bers. The antigens against which the immune responses are directed are currently unknown. On the effector side of PM the molecule perforin, which is found in cytotoxic granules of T-cells, seems to induce damage of the muscle cell membrane. Perforin is expressed in T-cells in PM as well as in DM. However, its intracellular localization varies between PM and DM. In DM it is distributed in a diffuse way whereas in T-cells in PM perforin is expressed vectorially towards the target muscle cell. Fas-expression is found in numerous T-cells and the Fas-ligand is widely expressed on the surface of muscle ®bers. Nevertheless, no signi®cant signs of apoptosis could be detected in muscle nuclei. This could be due to the co-expression of the anti-apoptotic molecule Bcl-2.

Regarding the T-cell-receptor expression, identical clonal expansions of CD81 T-cells could be detected in both the muscle and the blood of untreated PM patients.

Single cell PCR will help to clarify the pathophysiological signi®cance of these clonally expanded T-cells.

The pathophysiology of IBM is still under debate. According to Karpati IBM seems to be a multi-factorial disease. Various factors which are not well understood (age, genetic, acquired) lead to an alteration of the nuclear matrix. The hypothesis of Karpati is that these nuclear changes can explain the major ®ndings in s-IBM (sporadic inclusion body myositis) such as the myonuclear disintegration, the in¯ammatory response which can include expression of class I MHC at the surface of muscle and the appearance of `alien' proteins which are caused by an aberrant gene expression. The disconnection of the nuclear and mitochondrial genome leads to a malfunction of the mitochondria with the morphological picture of cytochrome-coxidase-de®cient ragged red ®bers. The appearance of the rimmed vacuoles may be the result of altered pH values in the cytoplasm caused by basic components of the nucleus. Presently, the immunological response which is triggered by altered proteins at the surface of muscle cells is the only potentially treatable part of s-IBM. The poor response to any kind of anti-dysimmune treatment indicates that the immunological reaction plays a minor role in the causation of the clinical picture of the disease.

Clinical picture

A. Manzur (London, UK) reported on his experience with 70 children suffering from in¯ammatory myopathies. In infancy and childhood DM is much more common than Neuromuscular Disorders 11 (2001) 88±92 0960-8966/01/$ -see front matter q 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: S09 60-8966(00)00161-9 www.elsevier.com/locate/nmd PM, which was found in two children only. DM was more frequently found in girls than in boys. The three cardinal symptoms of DM in children are weakness, misery and rash. The most common distribution of the rash is on the face and the knuckles, but may also occur over the knees, elbows and the axillary folds. Systemic manifestations of the disease such as affection of the gastrointestinal tract, joints and kidney may occur in children, but only in a minority.

K. Kunze (Hamburg, Germany) and St. Zierz (Halle, Germany) summarized the clinical features of adulthood PM and DM, emphasizing that the criteria established by Bohan and Peter in 1975 have not been replaced by clearly better ones. Proximal muscle weakness with or without myalgia is the main presentation in both diseases. However, both muscle weakness and the additional criteria of abnormal electromyographical ®ndings and elevated serum activity of muscle enzymes (CK and aldolase) are non-speci®c and can be found in many other neuromuscular disorders. DM additionally is characterized by typical skin abnormalities (e.g. heliotropic exanthema, Gottron's sign).

G. Karpati (Montreal, Canada) explained the clinical features of IBM as well as morphological characteristics of the different types of IIM. In contrast to PM and DM, patients are almost exclusively older than 50 years, and muscle weakness often involves distal muscles, especially the long ®nger ¯exors, or is asymmetrical. Bedside testing of the patients is the most important clue to the diagnosis of IBM. Patients never complain of myalgia. If pain is present it always can be explained as referring pain due to osteoarthritis or similar degenerative affections of bones and joints.

In initial stages of IBM distal paresis of the muscles is not a mandatory feature. At that stage IBM can be indistinguishable from PM.

At the end of the meeting the participants de®ned the criteria for DM, PM and IBM which are shown in Appendix A.

Diagnostic evaluation

Electromyography

W. Mu Èller-Felber (Munich, Germany) described the speci®c problems of clinical electromyography in the ®eld of in¯ammatory myopathies. Efforts to quantify the electrical signal during voluntary activation have shown a low diagnostic yield. That is true for the noise-based techniques such as the assessment of the number of turns, the amplitudes, power spectrum and for the MUAP-based procedures like automatic-decomposition-EMG or multi-MUAP. In a series of 138 patients with DM or PM Mu Èller-Felber showed that before treatment 10% of patients with DM had a normal EMG. Pathological spontaneous activity was found in 81% of patients with DM. Failure to detect changes in the electromyogram can be in some cases attributed to a focal invol-vement of muscles in in¯ammatory myopathies. In patients with anti-synthetase syndrome a very low yield of pathological ®ndings was observed. During the course of the disease there is an increase of the MUAP duration. Nevertheless, in most patients there is a persisting decrease of fastcomponent duration. In a series of 23 patients with IBM, a wide spectrum of electrophysiological ®ndings ranging from low amplitude, low duration to high amplitude, large duration MUAPs was found. Pathological spontaneous activity at rest was found in 13/23 patients.

Imaging

K. Kunze (Hamburg, Germany) and C.D. Reimers (Go Èttingen, Germany) stressed the value of muscle imaging for the diagnosis of in¯ammatory muscle disease. High signal intensities on T2-weighted or on fat-suppressive MR images in contrast to low signal intensities on T1-weighted images are the diagnostic hallmark of acute myositis. However, this constellation sometimes can also be found in non-in¯ammatory muscle disease such as metabolic myopathies or muscular dystrophies (especially in facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy) and even in healthy subjects after muscular exertion. These abnormalities should not uncritically be referred to muscle edema, because they probably are not caused by an increase of intramuscular water content in all cases. Presumably a shift of intra-and extracellular water into the other compartment without a change of the total water content results in increased signal intensity on T2-weighted and fat-suppressive MR images. Fat-suppressive MR sequences are more sensitive in depicting these abnormalities than T2-weighted images. In IIM, contrastenhanced MR images do not provide more information than plain images. The signal intensity on T2-weighted and fat-suppressive MR images re¯ects the active in¯ammation. Thus, regions exhibiting these abnormalities are most suitable for muscle biopsies. Ultrasonography is also able to depict active myositis, which is characterized by homogeneously increased echo-intensity. In chronic myositis, lipomatose degeneration of muscles occurs. In these cases, increased signal intensities appear on both T1-and T2weighted MR images. Ultrasonography exhibits inhomogeneously increased muscular echo-intensity. Judgement of ultrasonographical images is more dif®cult than that of MR images and needs considerable experience. Thus, it is still reserved for special units with high expertise in neuromuscular diseases.

Laboratory investigation

E. Genth (Aachen, Germany) presented his great experience on auto-antibodies in IIM. Depending on the selection of the patients up to 90% exhibit auto-antibodies, most of them, however, being non-speci®c such as antinuclear antibodies. Only one auto-antibody, i.e. signal recognition particle (SRP), is always associated with in¯ammatory muscle disease. In up to 60% of patients myositis-associated anti-bodies can be detected. The most common among these are anti-synthetase antibodies. With few exceptions only one speci®c antibody can be detected in a single patient.

Patients with auto-antibodies may show muscular, extramuscular or both manifestations of their disease.

Some auto-antibodies are associated with typical clinical features. Examples are the Jo-1-syndrome which consists of myositis, ®brosing alveolitis and skin involvement or patients with Pm-Scl-auto-antibodies, who exhibit scleroderma, Raynard's phenomenon, and often myositis.

Histological evaluation

In PM cellular in®ltrates can be found in more than 90% of all patients. Dalakas and Karpati stressed that in virtually all patients with PM, cellular in®ltrates should be found. If not re-biopsy is indicated. Nevertheless, there are few patients with the histological picture of necrotizing myopathy without cellular in®ltrates who show clinical symptoms of PM and who respond to immunosuppressive treatment. It cannot be decided whether this group of patients is an entity different from PM. An important clue is that in all forms of IIM, class I major histocompatibility complex products are present at the surface of muscle ®bers. This is very widespread in PM but may be patchy in DM and IBM. Normally, muscle ®bers do not express class I MHC.

Mu Èller-Felber (Munich, Germany) showed that in patients showing the histopathological picture of PM who did not respond to treatment, 50% turned out to suffer from s-IBM. The other patients suffered from muscular dystrophies (mainly in¯ammatory FSH-dystrophy).

Karpati reported that rimmed vacuoles, 15±18 nm tubu-lo®laments, nuclear abnormalities and intracellular amyloid deposits are characteristic signs. As mentioned above, the diagnosis can be missed in patients with otherwise typical signs of IBM.

Pongratz (Munich, Germany) showed that in contrast to PM and IBM, in DM the dominant immunoeffector mechanism is the membrane attack complex (MAC) which can be demonstrated by immunohistochemistry. The primary target cells for the in¯ammatory process are the blood vessels and not muscle ®bers. The histopathological consequences are capillary necrosis, vascular thrombosis, and ®nally ischemic myopathy.

Therapy

C.D. Reimers (Go Èttingen, Germany) reported that corticosteroids should be administered ®rst in all cases of IIM, although their ef®cacy has never been proven in randomized, controlled studies. However, clinical evidence is so overwhelming that bene®cial effects in DM and PM are beyond any doubt. In IBM, effects are missing or rather low. The optimal dosage has also never been studied systematically. However, a daily administration of 1 mg/ kg body weight has generally been accepted. High dosages can be given in divided portions. Lower doses should be given early in the morning. Their is no clear evidence that corticosteroids endanger the patient in relation to developing a gastric ulcer, so that H2-proton pump inhibitors must not be given if the patient has no corresponding history. Due to numerous adverse effects (e.g. osteoporosis, cataracts) other immunosuppressants should be added in those patients in whom muscle weakness cannot be alleviated considerably and the CK levels should be normalized within a few months.

J. Hoogendijk (Utrecht, The Netherlands) presented new data, still not published as an original article, indicating that a very high dose of prednisolone administration of 1000 mg or even more on 2 or 3 days a week might be more effective than conventional treatment and have only minor side effects. This cycle must be repeated after intervals of a few weeks.

M. Dalakas (Bethesda, MD, USA) reviewed the therapeutic regimes in PM and DM, focusing on the high-dose immunoglobulins. He also stressed that corticosteroids (prednisone or prednisolone) are still the agents of ®rst choice with a dosage of 1 mg/kg body weight per day. After 3 or 4 weeks the dosage should be decreased. In case of insuf®cient ef®cacy, additional immunosuppressants are needed. In contrast to former recommendations, he would use high-dose intravenous immunoglobulins (ivIG) as the medication of second choice due to its proven ef®cacy and relatively few and mild adverse effects. The recommended dosage was 2 g/kg body weight within 2±5 days. This should be repeated roughly every month for a few months, the intervals being lengthened corresponding to the course of the disease. According to present knowledge, ivIG act by means of suppression of C3 complement and reduction of lymphocytes. Azathioprine and methotrexate would be drugs of third choice.

Presently, high-dose immunoglobulins are the only therapeutics resulting in slight improvement or delayed worsening of IBM, although the results of treatment studies are not really convincing and the numbers of patients treated in randomized, controlled studies are rather low. Intravenous immunoglobulins 2 g/kg body weight per circle plus 60 mg prednisone did not improve muscle strength, but subjects who were treated felt better than those who received placebo instead of ivIG.

Manzur reported that children are treated initially with prednisolone 1 mg/kg body weight, which can be increased when indicated in the occasional case with a poor response. He recommended cyclosporin-A for those patients who do not tolerate reduction of corticosteroids or who are refractory to corticosteroids. In 24 out of 26 patients treated by cyclosporin-A, corticosteroids could be withdrawn. Finally, in 15 of these patients, cyclosporin-A could be withdrawn without a new exacerbation of the disease. Monitoring of therapy in children is mainly based on the clinical manifestations. Measurement of CK levels may further help to monitor these children.

Acknowledgements

This workshop was made possible thanks to the ®nancial support of the European Neuromuscular Center (ENMC) and ENMC main sponsors: Association Francaise contre les myopathies (France); Italian Telethon Committee (Italy); Muscular Dystrophy Group of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (UK); Vereniging Spierziekten Nederlands (The Netherlands); Muskelsvindfonden (Denmark); Deutsche Gesellschaft fu Èr Muskelkranke (Germany); Schweizerische Stiftung fu Èr die Erforschung der Muskelkrankheiten (Switzerland); Prinses Beatrix Fonds (The Netherlands); Verein zur Erforschung von Muskelkrankheiten bei Kindern (Austria).

Wolfgang Muller-Felber

Friedrich-Baur-Institut, Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich, Germany 

