Sporadic Inclusion Body Myositis in a Patient with Human T Cell Leukemia Virus Type 1-Associated Myelopathy

Sporadic inclusion body myositis is a disease of unknown pathogenesis in which a viral etiology has long been suspected. We report a case that occurred in a patient with human T cell leukemia virus type 1-associated myelopathy. The diagnosis was confirmed by histopathological studies of the deltoid muscle. Nucleic acids amplification and in situ hybridization indicated the presence of integrated proviral DNA and viral mRNA transcripts in the lesions.

The development of some inflammatory myopathies in humans and nonhuman primates has been associated, naturally or experimentally, with retrovirus infections-for example, with infection by HIV, simian immunodeficiency virus, human T cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1), and human foamy virus, or by coinfection with both HIV and HTLV-1. HTLV-1 causes a variety of diseases, including a neurological syndrome called "tropical spastic paraparesis/HTLV-1-associated myelopathy" (TSP/HAM) [1,2]. Muscle involvement associated with HTLV-1 infection has been reported to occur both in patients with TSP/HAM and in HTLV-1-infected patients without neurological impairment [3][4][5][6][7]. Biopsies of muscle show features of myositis with mononuclear interstitial infiltrates, necrosis, and regeneration. The pathogenesis of such polymyositis has not been clearly understood; viral and host factors, such as the immune response, are thought to be involved. HTLV-1 proviral DNA and viral antigens occasionally have been detected in

infiltrating mononuclear cells [3][4][5][6][7]. The detection of provirus in myofibers is still controversial. It has been suggested that HTLV-1-associated polymyositis is not caused by a direct viral effect but, rather, by a T-cell-mediated process triggered by the activation of infiltrating inflammatory cells present in the focal lesions. Therefore, muscle pathology could be the result of either an autoimmune response or bystander damage to the myofibers.

Sporadic inclusion body myositis (sIBM) is a distinct form of chronic inflammatory myopathy of unknown pathogenesis for which a viral etiology has often been suspected [8]. The lesions are characterized by vacuolated muscle fibers that contain paired helical filaments similar to those of Alzheimer's disease. Several proteins characteristic of plaques or lesions of the brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease, such as the bamyloid protein, hyperphosphorylated t, and apolipoprotein E, are present in vacuolated myofibers [8]. For unknown reasons, both prion protein and mRNA are also abnormally accumulated in the vacuoles. Immunocytochemical staining for ubiquitin may help to differentiate sIBM from polymyositis [9].

Association of sIBM with HTLV-1 infection has only been recently suggested, but it remains poorly documented [10,11]. To our knowledge, only 2 patients with such an association have been described. In the first case [10,12], sIBM occurred in a patient with TSP/HAM, but the diagnosis of this case was based only on the findings of light microscopy without electron microscopic data. The second case [11] was only briefly reported in an abstract. Here, we describe a Caribbean patient who developed sIBM associated with a TSP/HAM syndrome. The case is well documented clinically, pathologically, and virologically. We discuss the potential role of HTLV-1 infection in the pathogenesis of this case of sIBM.

Case report. The patient was a 38-year-old French West Indian (Martinique) native woman who complained, in 1998, of asthenia, lower back pain, and sciatalgia. In 1992, she first experienced progressive weakness that involved the lower proximal limb muscles, in association with a progressive upper limb muscular weakness. In addition to symmetric proximal weakness of the 4 limbs, the patient had brisk reflexes with bilateral Babinski's sign. There was neither a familial history of neuromuscular disease nor known risk factors, with the exception that the patient came from an area of endemicity for HTLV-1 and was breast-fed at birth. High titers of anti-HTLV-1 antibodies were detected in both the plasma and CSF by means of A and B, Histological examination of a deltoid muscle biopsy specimen from a patient who was seropositive for human T cell leukemia virus type 1 (magnification, ϫ520). Semithin sections stained with toluidine blue show the presence of atrophic angular fibers and inflammatory cell infiltrate (A); immunolabeling showing presence of ubiquitin deposits in vacuolated fibers (B). C, Electron micrographs show autophagic vacuoles that contain abnormal filaments in muscle fibers (uranyl acetate-lead citrate; magnification, ϫ4425). D, Higher magnification (ϫ31,500), shows clusters of intracytoplasmic filaments of 18 nm in diameter. specific immunofluorescence testing of MT2 cells that produce HTLV-1 antigens (plasma, 1/10,240; CSF, 1/16). Western blotting confirmed, in both plasma and CSF, the complete pattern and specificity of the antibody reactivity directed against Gag (p19, p24, and Pr53) and Env (GD21 and MTA-1) HTLV-1 antigens. Furthermore, the sequences obtained from the PCRamplified products of the HTLV-1 long terminal repeat demonstrate that the HTLV-1 that was present in the muscle belonged to the molecular subtype A (cosmopolitan).

Biological data indicated a mild elevation in muscle enzymes (serum creatine phosphokinase level, 512 IU/L; aldolase level, 12.9 IU/L [normal level, !7.6 IU/L]). The patient was treated with levothyroxine (150 mg/day) for Hashimoto's thyroiditis. MRI of the brain and spinal cord yielded normal results. CSF analysis showed an increased level of intrathecal IgG. Electromyography demonstrated a myogenic pattern in deltoid and proximal lower limb muscles associated with a neurogenic pattern in the quadriceps muscle and normal sensorimotor conduction.

A transient improvement in the patient's clinical course was observed in 1998; after iv IgG therapy had been repeated monthly.

Light and electron microscopy studies of deltoid muscle biopsy samples showed mild interstitial lymphocytic and macrophagic infiltrates and scattered vacuolated muscle fibers. There were small angular fibers, few hypertrophic fibers, few necrotic or regenerating fibers, rarefied type 2B fibers, and vacuolated myofibers with ubiquitin-positive inclusions (figure 1A,  1B). Ultrastructural study (figure 1C, 1D) revealed typical autophagic vacuoles that contained filaments of 18 nm in diameter and moderate glycogen and lipid storage.

Immunohistochemical data indicated that HLA-DR ϩ and CD68 ϩ macrophages (figure 2A, 2B), as well as CD4 ϩ (figure 2C) and CD8 ϩ lymphocytes were present in the inflammatory infiltrates within the muscle lesions. Immunoreactivity for complement components (C3, C5, and C5b9) was also present in the inflammatory infiltrates but not in the muscle fibers (data not shown). No reactivity with the polyclonal anti-Tax antibody could be detected in the inflammatory cells.

Simultaneous isolation of DNA and RNA from the same deltoid muscle biopsy sample was performed by use of TRI-Reagent (Molecular Research Center). To seek integrated provirus, a tax DNA fragment of 340 bp (ATK1 sequence, nucleotides 7432-7772) was amplified by PCR (35 cycles at 94ЊC for 1 min, 60ЊC for 1 min, 72ЊC for 30 s). Furthermore, to detect the expression of spliced HTLV-1 tax mRNA, cDNA was synthesized from 10 mg of total RNA by use of avian myeloblastosis virus reverse transcriptase with random hexamers. A 217-bp fragment from position 5098 (5 of tax splice donor site) to position 7438 was amplified for 35 cycles with Taq DNA polymerase and 250-500 ng of cDNA. In both cases, amplified products were detected by Southern blot hybridization with a specific internal oligonucleotide 32 P-labeled probe. The muscle biopsy sample was positive for both HTLV-1 proviral DNA and tax mRNA detection, as indicated by PCR and reverse transcriptase-PCR analysis (figure 3A).

To investigate whether HTLV-1 replication takes place within the muscle lesions, in situ hybridization was done as described elsewhere [13]. 33 P antisense and sense riboprobes that corresponded to the complete tax mRNA were derived from the T3 and T7 promoters of the Bluescript transcription vector. Antisense tax probe was chosen because all types of HTLV-1 RNAs-genomic as well as singly or doubly spliced-hybridize to this region of the viral genome. To obtain a specific signal, in situ hybridization was done with high-stringency conditions of hybridization and washing steps. Exposure time was 10-21 days for 6 cpm/slide. No or low background was observed 1 ϫ 10 in these in situ hybridization experiments (figure 3). Focal positivity with rare infected HTLV-1 cells that showed a specific HTLV-1 tax mRNA signal were detected in inflammatory cells outside the muscle fibers (figure 3B). As controls, in adjacent muscle sections, in situ hybridization done with a sense tax riboprobe did not result in detectable signals (figure 3C). As in patients with HAM/TSP, viral replication seems to be maintained at a restricted level. In situ hybridization done on in vitro-activated peripheral blood mononuclear cells showed high expression of tax mRNA (figure 3D).

Discussion. In this study, we report a typical case of sIBM that occurred in a Caribbean patient with TSP/HAM. Findings of clinical, biological, and electromyographic studies were consistent with the diagnosis of sIBM, which was confirmed by microscopy studies of the deltoid muscle that demonstrated mild interstitial lymphocytic and macrophagic infiltrates and scattered vacuolated myofibers with ubiquitin-positive inclusions. Furthermore, an ultrastructural study showed typical autophagic vacuoles that contained filaments of 18 nm in diameter. Regarding virological data, PCR and reverse transcriptase-PCR analysis indicated the presence of integrated HTLV-1 proviral DNA of the cosmopolitan molecular subtype and viral mRNA transcripts in the pathological lesions of the Figure 3. Integration and expression of human T cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) within a biopsy sample obtained from a patient with sporadic inclusion body myositis. A, PCR and reverse transcriptase-PCR products, obtained from DNA and total RNA extracted from a muscle biopsy specimen, as detected by Southern blot hybridization with 32 P-specific tax oligonucleotide internal probe. Lanes 1-3, Amplification was obtained with DNA from the deltoid muscle, MT2 cells as positive control, and lymphoid T-cell line HTLV-1 (CEM) cells as negative control, respectively. Lanes 4-6, reverse transcriptase-PCR amplification obtained with tax cDNA from a deltoid muscle biopsy specimen and positive and negative controls, respectively. B and C, Detection of HTLV-I mRNA expression by means of in situ hybridization with 33 P tax antisense (B) and sense (C) riboprobes on frozen sections of deltoid muscle. After hybridization with antisense tax riboprobe, focal positivity for HTLV-I was observed outside the muscle fibers in inflammatory cells, near the muscle blood vessel. Exposure time was 21 days. Tissue sections were stained with hematoxylin-eosin. Magnification, ϫ500. D and E, After 3 days of in vitro activation, in situ hybridization was done on patient peripheral blood mononuclear cells, by use of antisense (D) and sense (E) tax riboprobes. Exposure time was 8 days. Slides were stained with Giemsa and were mounted in Eukitt. Magnification, ϫ300. deltoid muscle. Furthermore, in situ hybridization showed a few cells with a signal for tax mRNA.

Therefore, it appears that the clinical, pathological, and immunologic patterns of sIBM that occurs in HTLV-1-infected patients are similar to those of sIBM that occurs in nonretrovirus-infected patients [12]. However, the mechanism by which HTLV-1 can trigger the disease remains unclear. The low level of HTLV-1 transcription that occurs only in infiltrating cells indicates that HTLV-1 does not cause a persistent infection of the muscle fibers. No reactivity was detected with use of the anti-Tax antibody, probably in relation to the low level of viral protein expression in the infected tissues, as reported for other HTLV-1-associated diseases (e.g., TSP/HAM, polymyositis, and adult T cell leukemia). Furthermore, in the 2 previously reported cases of sIBM associated with HTLV-1 infection, it was similarly concluded that HTLV-1 does not directly infect the muscle, on the basis of the lack of detection of HTLV-1 gag p19 in the myofibers of the 2 patients [10][11][12]. For these 2 cases, no in situ hybridization was done. We detected complement components in the focal infiltrates but not on the microvasculature, as described for dermatomyositis [14], or on the muscle fibers, as shown in X-linked vacuolar myopathy [15].

Our data, and those previously published elsewhere, raise the hypothesis that such IBM is triggered by mononuclear infiltrating cells persistently infected with HTLV-1, because no viral components were found in the muscle fibers. Therefore, the pathogenesis of this peculiar sIBM may require a persistent retrovirus infection and the activation of an antiviral or antimuscle-directed inflammatory response. A generalized or localized immune activation in muscles, caused by HTLV-1 leading to increased levels of cytokines and enhanced expression of cell adhesion molecules [16], might be implicated in the development of the focal lesions observed in the muscle biopsy specimen. The understanding of the precise role of lymphoid cell activation and the factors, such as cytokine secretion, induced by HTLV-1 infection will be of major interest in the study of HTLV-1-linked pathology.

Acknowledgments

We thank F. Bernard, M. C. Cumont, F. Levi-Acobas, and M. C. Rouche ´, for technical assistance, and Lu ¨der Behrens, for critical reading of the manuscript and helpful discussions.

Figure 1 .1Figure 1.Light and electron microscopy studies. A and B, Histological examination of a deltoid muscle biopsy specimen from a patient who was seropositive for human T cell leukemia virus type 1 (magnification, ϫ520). Semithin sections stained with toluidine blue show the presence of atrophic angular fibers and inflammatory cell infiltrate (A); immunolabeling showing presence of ubiquitin deposits in vacuolated fibers (B). C, Electron micrographs show autophagic vacuoles that contain abnormal filaments in muscle fibers (uranyl acetate-lead citrate; magnification, ϫ4425). D, Higher magnification (ϫ31,500), shows clusters of intracytoplasmic filaments of 18 nm in diameter.

Figure 2 .2Figure2. Characterization of inflammatory infiltrate by immunocytochemistry. Serial 5-mm-thick fresh frozen sections were fixed in acetone and processed for detection of HLA-DR ϩ (A) and CD68 ϩ (B) macrophages. CD4 ϩ T cell subset was detected by use of NU-TH/1 antibodies (C). Tissue sections were counterstained with Harris hematoxylin and were mounted in Eukitt. Magnification, ϫ520.

