A controlled study of intravenous immunoglobulin combined with prednisone in the treatment of IBM

Particle-associated retroviral RNA and tandem RGH/HERV-W copies on chromosome 7q: possible components of a 'chain-reaction' triggered by infectious agents in multiple sclerosis.

Sporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM), a commonly occurring acquired inflammatory myopathy in patients older than 50 years, has been difficult to treat. [1][2][3][4] The primary cause of the disease is unknown, and no treatment is available. In the muscle biopsy specimens, degenerative signs such as vacuolar formation and amyloid deposits coexist with a series of immune-mediated features [6][7][8][9][10] that argue for an autoimmune pathogenesis. On this basis, IBM is being treated with immunosuppressive or immunomodulating drugs but with limited success. [1][2][3][4][5] The use of high-dose IV immunoglobulin (IVIg) as an immunomodulating drug in the treatment of several autoimmune neuromuscular disorders 11 has prompted us to try IVIg in patients with IBM. In one uncontrolled study, 12 IVIg was promising, but the results were negative in another. 13 A first randomized cross-over trial in 19 patients with IBM 14 showed modest but no significant benefits. Another study showed similar effects. 15 We performed this double-blind, placebocontrolled study in 36 patients with IBM to determine whether the combination of IVIg with prednisone, compared with prednisone alone, has a synergistic effect in improving muscle strength. The prednisone was added in an effort to enhance the efficacy of IVIg, because: 1) in dermatomyositis, in which IVIg is effective, post-hoc analysis showed more sustained improvement in patients receiving concurrent steroids 16 ; and 2) in Guillain-Barré syn-drome, IV methylprednisolone enhanced the efficacy of IVIg. 17

Methods. Patients. Thirty-seven patients fulfilling the diagnostic criteria of s-IBM [1][2][3] were selected for the study among patients referred to the Neuromuscular Diseases Section of the NIH. Eligible patients had active disease characterized by progressive muscle weakness that caused an impaired ability to perform independently various activities of daily living such as walking without falls, dressing, buttoning, or climbing up stairs. The patients were ambulatory independently or with assistance. Wheelchairbound patients were excluded. All patients fulfilled the histologic features of the typical s-IBM, 1 as confirmed with a muscle biopsy performed in most patients within 4 weeks before enrollment. Several patients had been treated previously with high-dose prednisone or therapeutic doses of another immunosuppressant (methotrexate, azathioprine), but they had not been taking any such medicine up to 3 months before enrollment. None of the patients had received IVIg previously, and none of them had participated in our previous trial. 14 Patients with coronary artery disease, IgA deficiency, kidney dysfunction, or any systemic illness were excluded. The institutional review board of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke approved the protocol, and the patients, who gave their written informed consent, were admitted to the Clinical Center at the NIH.

Study design. The protocol, a double-blind, placebocontrolled design, specified the administration of monthly infusions of IVIg or placebo, consisting of dextrose in halfnormal saline, for 3 consecutive months. The patients were assigned to receive IVIg or placebo by a blockrandomization procedure. The day before randomization to IVIg or placebo, all patients were started on 60 mg prednisone every day for 4 weeks followed by slow tapering to every other day by reducing 10 mg every other week (60/ 50; 60/40; 60/30, etc) till they reached 60 mg every other day, almost 6 weeks later. Thus, all patients during the 3-month IVIg/placebo period were concurrently receiving the combination of an adequate dose of prednisone. The prednisone was tapered thereafter by 10 mg every week until discontinuation, 6 weeks after completion of the infusions.

All patients were followed up to 1 additional month after the three monthly IVIg/placebo infusions. The randomization code was not broken until all of the patients had completed the study and the results were analyzed. The principal investigator, physicians, nurses, and statisticians were unaware of which type of the IV infusion was administered. Randomization was performed at the pharmacy, and the bottles of IVIg or placebo were wrapped in aluminum foil and brought to the patient's room, as described. 14,16 An opaque plastic bag covered the IV set so that any possible fluid turbidity or frothing would not be evident to the investigators or patients. Before and after each infusion and monthly thereafter, routine blood chemistry, complete blood count, and serum muscle enzymes were determined and side effects recorded.

The dose of IVIg was 2 g per kilogram of body weight divided into two daily doses of 1 g per kilogram each, given slowly less than 200 mL/hour, as described. 11,16 The patients were encouraged to continue their routine daily activities while at home.

Assessments. Changes in skeletal muscle strength were assessed with the modified (expanded) Medical Research Council (MRC) scale in which 0 is the lowest and 10 the highest, 18 and with the Quantitative Muscle Testing (QMT) assessing the maximum voluntary isometric contraction. 19 The QMT was performed by a trained nurse who remained blinded and examined the following muscle groups: shoulder abduction; forearm flexion and extension; hip flexion; leg extension and flexion; and foot extensors. The manual muscle strength testing was performed on the following 13 muscle groups on each side: deltoid, biceps brachii, triceps brachii, brachioradialis, wrist extensors, wrist flexors, iliopsoas, gluteus maximus, quadriceps femoris, hamstrings, and the foot extensors or flexors. The primary outcome measures were a change in the total MRC and QMT scores from baseline to the end of treatment. Each patient was evaluated throughout the study by the same neurologist assigned to the patient from the outset. The principal investigator (M.C.D.) was not one of the evaluators. The net differences in the MRC or QMT scores from baseline to the end of the 3-month treatment were compared between the patients randomized to the two treatment groups (IVIg ϩ prednisone compared with placebo ϩ prednisone). The total QMT scores (megascores) were examined separately for the proximal (deltoid, biceps, triceps, quadriceps, and iliopsoas) and the distal (wrist extensors and flexors, foot extensors and flexors) muscles, as described. 14 Secondary outcome measures were a change in: 1) the histologic features in repeated biopsies; and 2) the patient's subjective assessment, as described later.

Figure 1. Flow chart of the randomized, controlled trial of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) combined with prednisone in the treatment of inclusion body myositis.

Statistical analysis. For each of the patients randomized to IVIg or placebo, six primary endpoints, each consisting of sub-endpoints from three time points (total, 18 sub-endpoints), were obtained to capture changes at various intervals. The percentage of the change in the scores obtained from month 1 to month 2, from month 1 to month 3, and from month 1 to month 4, was calculated for the: 1) QMT of upper extremes; 2) QMT of lower extremities; 3) total MRC for right upper extremity; 4) total MRC for right lower extremity; 5) total MRC for left upper extremity; and 6) total MRC for left lower extremity.

Descriptive statistics (number of observations, mean, SD, minimum, maximum, and standard error) for each of the 18 sub-endpoints were tabulated for each treatment group. Comparison of the 18 sub-endpoints by treatment group was performed by applying the two-sided sample t-test.

Patients's own assessment about response to therapy. At the end of the study and before breaking the code, the patients were asked to provide their own assessment about therapy and 1) speculate as to whether they received placebo or IVIg; 2) define whether they experienced any improvement or worsening from the time after each infusion; 3) rate their overall change by indicating if their muscle strength had remained stable, improved, or worsened; and 4) specify whether an improvement was meaningful in their activities of daily living.

Repeated muscle biopsies.

Repeated open muscle biopsies were performed in 24 patients who consented to a second biopsy; 22 biopsies were performed from the same site as the first, and two biopsies were performed from the opposite site. We assessed 1) the number of necrotic fibers by the trichrome stain in three randomly selected fields at 10ϫ; 2) the ratio of necrotic fibers per total number of fibers counted in the same three fields; and 3) the number of endomysial T cells immunostained with monoclonal antibodies against CD2 in an immunoperoxidase technique, as described. 16 The total number of CD2ϩ cells and total number of fibers were counted blindly before breaking the study code in three randomly selected fields at 20ϫ. The ratio of CD2ϩ cells per fiber was calculated. Foci of inflammation were also counted in three 10ϫ fields on hematox-ylin and eosin (H&E)-stained sections and scored as follows: 0: no foci; 1: up to two foci; 2: between three to four foci; 3: five or more foci.

Results. Baseline data. Thirty-six patients completed the study. (One patient who was randomized to placebo and died of a heart attack after the first infusion was not included). Nineteen patients were randomized to IVIg ϩ prednisone and 17 to placebo ϩ prednisone (figure 1 and table 1). No protocol violations were observed. No follow-up data were available in one patient from the first group (see figure 1). The total QMT and MRC scores at baseline in both groups were similar securing adequacy of randomization. The mean age for both groups was also similar (table 1).

Changes in muscle strength assessed by MRC scales. The percentage of change from baseline to months 1, 2, or 3 for the upper or lower extremities showed no difference between the two groups (p Ͻ 0.1) (table 2). Small but insignificant losses in muscle strength were noted in both groups. Minor gains noted in the first month in the prednisone ϩ IVIg randomized group were not significant and were not sustained in the 2nd or 3rd months (see table 2). Subanalysis of proximal and distal muscle groups showed no difference (data not shown).

Changes in strength assessed by QMT scores. As shown in table 3, minor losses were noted in the upper extremities for both groups, but they were not significant. In the lower extremities, there were minor gains in both groups, which also were not significant (see table 3). Subanalysis of distal and proximal muscles showed no difference (data not shown).

Patients own assessment. No serious side effects were noted in the IVIg-randomized patients, and no apparent   signs to unblind any of the patients were observed. Among the side effects of steroids, mild weight gain and irritability were present in most patients. As shown in table 4, half of the patients randomized to IVIg stated increased endurance and ability to better perform some activities of daily living. Such a "subjective improvement" was thought to be related to IVIg and not to steroids because it was not observed in the placebo group who also received steroids, and it was not experienced by the same patients when they had received steroids before this trial. Also, there was no evidence that a more significant clinical improvement might have been overlooked if the muscle strategy had been assessed more frequently between the monthly visits. Histologic and T cell changes in the repeated muscle biopsies. Among the 24 repeated muscle biopsies, 12 were in the patients who received IVIg and prednisone and the other 12 in patients who received placebo and prednisone. At baseline, the mean number of necrotic fibers in the IVIg/prednisone randomized patients was 0.002 (0 -006) and in the placebo/prednisone group was 0.003 (0 -0.008). After therapy, the number of necrotic fibers decreased significantly in the IVIg/prednisone patients to a mean of 0.0004 (0 -0.004) compared with 0.003 (0 -0.014) in the placebo/prednisone group (p Ͻ 0.01). The mean number of CD2ϩ cells per high-power field decreased significantly after treatment in both groups (figure 2), indicating a steroid-related effect. However, when the mean number of CD2ϩ cells was assessed per myofiber, the reduction after therapy was more significant (p Ͻ 0.005) in the IVIg/ prednisone randomized group, probably because of larger SD in the pretreatment biopsy specimens of patients randomized to placebo (figure 3). The number of foci of endomysial inflammation was also more significantly reduced in the IVIg/prednisone-randomized patients (p Ͻ 0.005) compared with the placebo/prednisone-randomized group (not shown).

Discussion. In our second, double-blind, placebocontrolled study in the treatment of s-IBM, the combination of IVIg with prednisone showed no significant effect in improving muscle strength, the primary outcome measure. The lack of efficacy during the 3-month study period was unequivocal and independently documented with the two reliable and validated means of assessing muscle strength in therapeutic drug trials, the MRC and the QMT scores.

The expectation that prednisone will enhance the efficacy of IVIg and will achieve significance was unfulfilled. In the previous controlled study in which IVIg was given for 3 months in a cross-over design, 14 regional improvements in the strength of limb and swallowing muscles were noted, suggesting that IVIg may be of some value for some patients and for a period. We had hypothesized that the relatively small sample size and the cross-over design with possible carry-over effects might have influenced the outcome. Our inability to confirm any improvement in the current study even regionally, including the muscles of swallowing (data not shown), may be due to various reasons. First, IVIg may not be effective in IBM, and the previously noted regional improvements might have been a spurious finding. Second, the patients' age might have been a factor. In our first study, the mean age of the treated patients was 61.2 years, compared with 68.2 in the current study. Aging has a negative effect in the disease process, with faster progression in patients older than age 70 years 20 because of poor muscle reserves and enhanced mitochondrial changes occurring possibly with advancing age. 21 Furthermore, the older patients included in the current study might have had more advanced disease than the patients in the first study. Third, the concomitant use of steroids may have had a negative effect. In s-IBM, where there is significant muscle fiber atrophy, high-dose steroids may be deleterious by affecting the thick filaments of the already atrophic or myogenously denervated muscle fibers, as documented experimentally. 22 Such an effect may account not only for the lack of efficacy but also for negating the mild, if not spurious, re- 

Figure 3. Mean number of CD2ϩ cells per myofiber (Ϯ SD) in the muscle biopsy specimens of patients with inclusion body myositis before and after treatment with placebo and prednisone (first and second columns) or intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) with prednisone (third and fourth columns).

There is a significant reduction in the IVIg group.

gional improvements noted in the first study when IVIg was used alone. 14 Whether, in patients with long-standing disease, who commonly have severe muscle fiber atrophy, the use of high-dose prednisone may potentially compromise muscle strength remains to be determined. Fourth, the immunomodulatory actions of IVIg 23 may not be sufficient or relevant to modify the ongoing immune response or significantly alter the sensitized T cell subsets among the endomysial infiltrates. Finally, important study variables, such as slow disease progression, clinical heterogeneity, and the variability of the QMT and MRC scales, might have required a larger sample size to enhance the power of the study and capture minor but functionally meaningful changes in muscle strength and activities of daily living.

Although the number of necrotic fibers and endomysial T cells diminished in the post-treatment muscle biopsy specimens, theses changes were not functionally significant, as noted also by others. 24 Whether such a reduction might translate into a biologic effect had the trial been continued for a longer period is unknown. However, in spite of the noted significant numerical reduction, the autoinvasive T cells and certain cytokines, such as TGF-␤, continued to be brisk in all post-treatment biopsy specimens. 25 This is in contrast to patients with dermatomyositis, who not only improve clinically after IVIg but whose improvement is accompanied by an immunohistopathologic improvement, including reduction of transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-␤) and TGF-␤ mRNA in the repeated muscle biopsy specimens. 16,24 The subjective effect of "feeling stronger" experienced by nine patients was an expression of endurance rather than strength and enabled those patients to carry out some of their daily activities more easily. This effect was short-lived and related to IVIg and not to steroids, because it was observed only in the IVIg-randomized patients, many of whom had previously received steroids without benefit.

The lack of improvement in strength, the primary end-point of our study, was disappointing, and the therapeutic dilemma 26 in s-IBM continues. Future studies aimed at slowing down disease progression rather than improving strength may be more realistic in such a chronic disease and need to be pursued when the natural history of the disease is established. 27 

Figure 2 .2Figure 2. Mean number Ϯ SD of endomysial CD2ϩ cells per high-power field in the muscle biopsy specimens before and after treatment with placebo and prednisone (first and second column) or intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) with prednisone (third and fourth column) in patients with sporadic inclusion body myositis.There is a significant reduction (p Ͻ 0.0001) in both groups, indicating a steroid-related effect.

Table 1 Randomization1PatientsMean age, yQMTMRCIVIg ϩ prednisone,68.21245.9 Ϯ 49.2 237.6 Ϯ 7.8n ϭ 19Placebo ϩ prednisone,68.35223.n ϭ 179 Ϯ 47.1 229.2 Ϯ 9.6 MRC ϭ Medical Research Council; QMT ϭ Quantitative Muscle Testing.

Table 22Change, %, Ϯ SD of Medical Research Council scores in patients randomized to IVIg or placeboTime frameIVIg ϩ prednisonePlacebo ϩ prednisoneUpper extremitiesAfter 1 monthϩ2.5 Ϯ 5.31Ϫ0.5 Ϯ 6.4After 2 monthsϪ1.41 Ϯ 3.9Ϫ3.1 Ϯ 5.4After 3 monthsϪ2.2 Ϯ 6.8Ϫ3.6 Ϯ 8.3Lower extremitiesAfter 1 monthϩ2.44 Ϯ 7.25Ϫ0.63 Ϯ 8.2After 2 monthsϪ1.32 Ϯ 8.06Ϫ2.88 Ϯ 10.7After 3 monthsϪ2.98 Ϯ 8.86Ϫ3.33 Ϯ 12.6ϩ ϭ Gain in strength; Ϫ ϭ loss in strength.

Table 33Change, %, Ϯ SD of Quantitative Muscle Testing scores in patients randomized to IVIg or placeboTime frameIVIg ϩ prednisonePlacebo ϩ prednisoneUpper extremitiesAfter 1 monthϪ3.5 Ϯ 13.9Ϫ0.06 Ϯ 3.0After 2 monthsϪ2.42 Ϯ 19.0Ϫ3.74 Ϯ 13.4After 3 monthsϪ4.4 Ϯ 18.6Ϫ0.1 Ϯ 12.4Lower extremitiesAfter 1 monthϩ12.9 Ϯ 20.9ϩ9.64 Ϯ 18.56After 2 monthsϩ6.44 Ϯ 23.0ϩ6.0 Ϯ 17.0After 3 monthsϩ11.5 Ϯ 26.8ϩ6.77 Ϯ 15.3ϩ ϭ Gain in strength; Ϫ ϭ loss in strength.

Table 44Patient's subjective response to treatmentIVIg ϩ prednisonePlacebo ϩ prednisonePatient response(19 patients)(17 patients)Felt better,9* †1performed moreFelt weaker11No change914* Two patients worsened after end of therapy. † Several patients had not felt better when they had received prednisone previously.

