Inclusion-Body Myositis: Newest Concepts of Pathogenesis and Relation to Aging and Alzheimer Disease

We review the newest advances related to seeking the pathogenic mechanism(s) of sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM) and present the pathologic diagnostic criteria of s-IBM. We discuss the possible pathogenic role of several themes, such as 1) increased amyloid-␤ precursor protein (A␤PP) and of its fragment A␤; 2) phosphorylation of tau protein; 3) oxidative stress; 4) abnormal a) signal-transduction, b) transcription, and c) RNA accumulation; 5) ''junctionalization'' and ''myogenous'' denervation; and 6) lymphocytic inflammation. Evidence is provided supporting our hypothesis that overexpression of A␤PP within the aging muscle fibers is an early upstream event causing the subsequent pathogenic cascade. The remarkable pathologic similarities between s-IBM muscle and Alzheimer disease (AD) brain are discussed, and the possible cause and significance are addressed.

INTRODUCTION

''Inclusion-body myositis'' (IBM) (1) describes patients with chronic myositis whose biopsy specimens have, in addition to lymphocytic inflammation, abnormal muscle fibers containing characteristic filamentous inclusions in the cytoplasm and nuclei. Sporadic inclusionbody myositis (s-IBM), formerly underdiagnosed and considered uncommon, is being identified more often by clinicians and pathologists. It is the most common muscle disease of persons over age 50. Recent interest in s-IBM has been generated by the identification within IBM muscle fibers of ␤-pleated-sheet amyloid (2,3) and other striking pathologic features that were not believed to occur in diseased human muscle.

An intriguing aspect of the s-IBM muscle-fiber molecular phenotype is its remarkable similarity to that of AD brain (4). These similarities include accumulations of amyloid-␤ (A␤); 2 other epitopes of amyloid-␤ precursor protein (A␤PP); phosphorylated tau in the form of pairedhelical filaments (PHFs); presenilin-1; and several other proteins (details below).

In 1993 we introduced the term ''hereditary inclusionbody myopathies'' (h-IBMs) (5) to designate hereditary muscle diseases with pathology strikingly resembling that of sporadic IBM, except for lack of lymphocytic inflammation (and a few other features), hence, the term ''myopathy'' instead of ''myositis.'' The h-IBMs encompass several autosomal-recessive and dominant syndromes From the USC Neuromuscular Center, Department of Neurology, University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Good Samaritan Hospital, Los Angeles, California.

Correspondence to: Valerie Askanas, MD, PhD, USC Neuromuscular Center, Good Samaritan Hospital, 637 South Lucas Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90017-1912. manifesting progressive muscle weakness in various clinical presentations, but having similar features in the muscle biopsy. Clinical onset of the h-IBMs usually occurs in the second or third decade of life. The h-IBMs are not a subject of this review, but they have been recently reviewed and classified (5)(6)(7). Here we describe diagnostic pathologic criteria of s-IBM and highlight our new concepts of pathogenesis. Clinical aspects and treatment approaches have been recently reviewed (4,(6)(7)(8)(9)(10).

We propose that s-IBM is a degenerative muscle disease a) occurring in an aged muscle cellular environment, b) involving abnormal signal transduction and transcription, c) associated with intracellular accumulation and aggregation of several proteins, and d) resulting in the IBMspecific characteristic muscle degenerative process.

DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA OF s-IBM MUSCLE BIOPSIES Light-Microscopic Histochemistry and Immunocytochemistry

Characteristic light-microscopic pathologic features of s-IBM on the Engel-Gomori trichrome reaction (11) are a) muscle fibers with 1 or several, irregular and varioussized, vacuoles on a given 10-m-thick cross-section, and b) various degrees of lymphocytic inflammation, with some macrophages, varying from abundant in early stages to little or none in later stages (Fig. 1). In contrast to what is commonly stated, many vacuoles in IBM are either not ''rimmed'' or are only slightly rimmed. Within the vacuoles there is usually red and sometimes graygreenish material.

In a given section, 60%-80% of the s-IBM vacuolated muscle fibers contain amyloid foci positive with Congo red, thioflavin-s, and crystal violet (2,3). Because vacuoles can be very small and sometimes present in only a few muscle fibers, amyloid deposits can often be missed To diagnose s-IBM and help differentiate it from polymyositis by light-microscopy of fresh-frozen sections (Fig. 1), we recommend the following: 1) Engel-Gomori trichrome staining (11) to visualize vacuolated muscle fibers,  ). E: Horseradishimmunoperoxidase, demonstrating dark reaction-product with PHF-1 antibody covering PHFs exclusively, whereas the adjacent portion of the myofiber is not immunostained; PHF-1 antibody (gift from Dr. Peter Davies) recognizes AD phosphorylated tau. F: Cluster of 6-10 nm filaments. A: ϫ43,000; B, D: ϫ87,000; C: ϫ110,000; E, F: ϫ46,000.

mononuclear-cell inflammation, and the occasional ragged-red fibers. 2) Fluorescence-enhanced Congo red (12).

3) Immunocytochemical staining for the presence of PHFs (see below), utilizing SMI-31 monoclonal antibody (originally made to react with the phosphorylated heavy-chain of neurofilaments), which recognizes the phosphorylated tau of PHFs in s-IBM (13) and AD (14). 4) If SMI-31 antibody is not available, ubiquitin immunoreactivity within muscle fibers can be used to differentiate s-IBM from polymyositis (15). This point was further emphasized by a recent study indicating that ubiquitin-positive inclusions were present even in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded muscle biopsies of s-IBM patients, but not in any other inflammatory myopathies (16). 5) Alkaline phosphatase reaction to evaluate perimysial connective tissue staining, which is typically negative (occasionally minimal) in s-IBM but usually moderate to prominent in active polymyositis and dermatomyositis (6,7). We consider this alkaline-phosphatase activity to be an aspect of proliferating perimysial fibroblasts.

Ragged-red fibers and cytochrome-c-oxidase (COX) negative muscle fibers are characteristic but not diagnostic features of s-IBM pathology (6). Multiple mitochondrial DNA deletions (4,8) occur in s-IBM muscle-their contribution to muscle-fiber malfunction and degeneration is yet undefined, but we propose that overexpression of A␤PP may contribute to the mitochondrial abnormalities (details below).

Small angular muscle fibers that are histochemically dark with the pan-esterase and/or NADH-tetrazolium-reductase reactions are, in general, considered indicative of a recent-denervation component and are a characteristic feature of s-IBM muscle biopsies. We and others consider that there is an important denervation component in s-IBM, despite a report to the contrary (4).

Ultrastructural Abnormalities of s-IBM Vacuolated, and

Some Nonvacuolated, Muscle Fibers PHFs, often in clusters, strikingly resemble PHFs of AD brain, being 15-21 nm diameter and containing phosphorylated tau (Fig. 2) (17,18). The ultrastructural appearance of IBM PHFs depends on the tissue preparation (6). In 2%-4% of s-IBM muscle nuclei there are clusters (inclusions) of 15-21 nm ''tubulofilaments,'' which in favorable sections are seen to be paired-helical filaments like those in the cytoplasm (6).

The s-IBM vacuolated muscle-fiber cytoplasm also contains A␤-positive collections of 6-10 nm filaments (Fig. 2) (3,19), fine flocculomembranous and amorphous material (3,19). Myelin-like whorls and other lysosomal debris are also in the vacuolated fibers. Ultrastructurally abnormal mitochondria containing paracrystalline inclusions are occasionally present.

AGGREGATION AND ACCUMULATION OF SEVERAL PROTEINS ARE CHARACTERISTIC MORPHOLOGIC ASPECTS OF s-IBM MUSCLE FIBERS Amyloid Deposits

A number of different proteins, including the A␤, tau, prion, transthyretin, and others, have the propensity to self-aggregate into ␤-pleated-sheet amyloid (20). Our data indicate that in s-IBM, as evidenced by fluorescenceenhanced Congo-red and crystal-violet stainings, intramuscle-fiber amyloid deposits contain A␤ or PHF-tau, Fig. 3. Light-microscopy of s-IBM muscle biopsy. A-F: Demonstration of colocalization on the same section of Congo red visualized through a Texas red filter and of A␤-immunoreactivity (B, AMCA-labeled visualized through a blue filter); and on another section, of Congo red (C, E) and SMI-31 immunoreactivity (D, F). Congophilia corresponding to tau-immunoreactive PHFs appears as squiggly inclusions, whereas the one corresponding to A␤ accumulation (A, B) appears in the form of an intrafiber plaques. G-I: Adjacent sections demonstrate increased c-Jun immunoreactivity (B) and increased A␤PP mRNA by in situ hybridization (H, I), in the same abnormal muscle fiber. (''I'' is dark field interference-contrast of ''H''). A, B: ϫ2,200; C-F ϫ1,250; G-I: ϫ800. each of which is known to form self-aggregations of congophilic amyloid in AD brain (21)(22)(23). In s-IBM, A␤amyloid deposits light-microscopically appear in the form of intracellular small round plaques, or ''plaquettes,'' while amyloid deposits formed by PHF tau appear mainly as squiggly inclusions (Fig. 3) (18). Several other proteins were also demonstrated by ultrastructural immunocytochemistry to be associated with the PHF-tau or A␤ deposits (4,6). Unknown is their possible role in a) promoting self-aggregation of tau and/or A␤; b) themselves self-aggregating into congophilic amyloid (as is known for ␣-synuclein in vitro [24]); or c) being binding partners of tau and/or A␤, and/or other proteins colocalized there but not related to the amyloidogenesis per se.

Among our several patients with other non-IBM vacuolar myopathies, including acid-maltase deficiency, hypokalemic periodic paralysis, myofibrillar myopathy, and undefined types, none had true amyloid deposits. Abnormal muscle fibers in myofibrillar myopathy were reported to have fluorescence-enhanced congophilic accumulations (25). We confirmed this finding but doubt that in those patients congophilia represents true amyloid deposits because in none of our 3 patients was the congophilic material positive with either thioflavin-s or crystal-violet, Vol 60, January, 2001 as is typical amyloid (Askanas et al, unpublished observations). In our experience with many different neuromuscular disorders, the only one, in addition to s-and h-IBMs, with true intra-myofiber congophilic amyloid is oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) (26).

Accumulation of A␤ and A␤PP

A␤ and A␤PP have received considerable attention regarding the pathogenesis of AD (27,28). Although pathologic accumulations of A␤ and A␤PP were previously considered to be confined to the brain and its blood vessels, A␤ and C-and N-terminal epitopes of A␤PP are also abnormally accumulated in vacuolated, and some nonvacuolated, muscle fibers of s-IBM patients (4,(6)(7)(8).

The A␤PP gene produces several alternatively spliced transcripts (27). s-IBM abnormal muscle fibers have increased mRNA signal for the A␤PP-751 that contains the Kunitz-type protease inhibitor (KPI) motif (29). The increased A␤PP-mRNA colocalizes in the same foci as the abnormal accumulations of A␤PP immunoreactivity (including the A␤ epitopes) (29). The mechanism of A␤PP overproduction in s-IBM is not yet clarified, but our newest studies suggest that activation of the AP-1 transcription complex plays an important role (30). This and possible other mechanisms are discussed below.

In AD, it has been suggested that abnormal proteolytic processing of A␤PP leads to extracellular liberation of free A␤, which then aggregates into extracellular congophilic ␤-pleated sheets composing 6-10 nm amyloid fibrils, which themselves are clustered as amyloid plaques (27,28). In IBM, perhaps in addition to the demonstrated increase of A␤PP synthesis, there is abnormal A␤PP processing, or the excessively-synthesized A␤PP simply overloads the normal processing pathway, producing an unmanageable amount of otherwise-trivial A␤. Recently, A␤ in s-IBM muscle has been suggested to be crosslinked by transglutaminases 1a and 2, contributing to A␤ aggregation and insolubility (31). In AD brain, the extracellular accumulation of A␤ and other proteins in plaques is partially analogous to intracellular plaquettes in IBM. Although there is abundant secretion of A␤-40 and A␤-42 from cultured normal human muscle (Xie, McFerrin, Selkoe, Engel, Askanas, unpublished observations), and probably from muscle in vivo, in IBM there are no extracellular deposits of A␤ or congophilic material. Speculatively, this may be because, in comparison to AD brain, IBM muscle lacks a sufficient amount of an extracellular A␤-aggregating factor(s), has less abundant A␤ secretion, and/or has more efficient A␤ clearance from the extracellular space.

Accumulation of Phosphorylated Tau

Phosphorylated (hyperphosphorylated) tau is a major constituent of the AD intraneuronal PHFs (32). All 6 isoforms of brain tau are abnormally phosphorylated in AD PHFs. It has been postulated that abnormal phosphorylation of tau causes significant structural changes, resulting in its altered electrophoretic mobility, molecular size, interaction with microtubules, and possibly its propensity to become self-aggregated into PHFs (32).

In AD, and in IBM, not well understood are what starts the process of PHF formation, how PHFs are assembled, and why they accumulate. Hyperphosphorylation and/or abnormal glycation of tau are possible predisposing mechanisms (33).

s-IBM PHF tau is phosphorylated on the same epitopes as AD tau (18); therefore similar kinases might participate in tau phosphorylation. For example, our recent studies demonstrated that extracellular signal regulated protein kinase (ERK) is associated with IBM PHFs (34), suggesting a role in IBM tau phosphorylation and PHF formation. Also similarly to AD brain, cyclin-dependent kinases (cdk5) and jun-terminal kinase (JNK) are associated with IBM PHFs (34a, 34b), suggesting that they, too, may participate in IBM tau phosphorylation. Abnormal accumulations of cdk5 and ERK in IBM vacuolated muscle fibers were demonstrated previously, but their subcellular localization was not determined (35,36). Our newest studies demonstrate that glycogen synthase kinase-3␤ (GSK-3␤) is associated with IBM PHFs (34b). GSK-3␤ is an important kinase involved in tau phosphorylation and has been strongly implicated in the pathogenesis of AD (37). Thus, as in AD, phosphorylation of tau may be a major mechanism in the formation of IBM-PHFs.

Phosphorylated tau has a decreased ability to react with tubulin, a phenomenon proposed to be important in causing aggregation of phosphorylated tau into PHFs in AD (38). Free RNA can compete with tubulin for the cellular pool of tau, and, in vitro, RNA stimulates aggregation of tau into PHFs (39). We have recently found that RNA and survival motor neuron protein (SMN) are accumulated on IBM-PHFs (40). Thus, RNA, and perhaps SMN, may participate in formation of IBM-PHFs. SMN is able to bind directly to RNA and to RNA-binding proteins, and to have a role in RNA processing and in pre-mRNA splicing (40).

Accumulation of Apolipoprotein E (ApoE)

Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) is abnormally accumulated within s-IBM muscle fibers. Its light-microscopic localization is in the form of intracellular inclusions that closely colocalize with phosphorylated-tau and A␤ (41). Ultrastructurally it is localized to PHFs, 6-10 nm filaments, and amorphous material (41). Because ApoE-mRNA is not present in IBM abnormal muscle fibers (41), we postulate that ApoE is transported from the circulation into these fibers through the low-density lipoprotein receptors. In AD, a recent review (28) has addressed the possible pathogenic role of neuronal lipoprotein receptor related protein (LRP), including its function in transporting ApoE, A␤PP, cholesterol, and ␣-2 macroglobulin. In IBM muscle the role of ApoE and its transport receptor needs to be studied. Because ApoE binds to ␤-pleated-sheet amyloid produced by various proteins and to A␤ (4,28), it is possible that after transport of ApoE into IBM abnormal muscle fibers, it is captured by A␤ and further enhances A␤ fibrillogenesis. In sporadic and late-onset-familial forms of AD, an increased frequency of the ApoE 4 allele is associated with earlier clinical onset (28). In s-IBM patients, the ApoE 4 allele was not preferentially increased in 2 studies, but 1 group did report an increase (4).

Presenilin-1 (PS1)

Recently, Presenilin-1 (PS1) has also been found accumulated in IBM abnormal muscle fibers (42). PS1 is encoded by a gene on chromosome-14, missense mutations of which lead to the most common and aggressive form of familial AD (42). Even though there are no mutations of the PS1 gene in sporadic AD, the same abnormal accumulations of PS1 occur in the brains of both sporadic and familial Alzheimer patients-and in both, PS1 is immunolocalized to the same structures, namely neurofibrillary tangles (containing 15-21 nm PHFs) and senile plaques (containing 6-10 nm filaments) (42). These data suggest that in AD PS1 plays a yet-unknown role in a cerebral pathogenic cascade common to both sporadic and familial forms. The same may also be true in the IBMs, because in sporadic and hereditary forms, PS1 is accumulated on the same structures as in AD, namely, 15-21 nm PHFs and 6-10 nm filaments (42). The h-IBM patients studied were genetically linked to chromosome 9p1; they presumably did not have the chromosome-14 PS1 genetic abnormality (42). Whether PS1 plays a role in the pathogenesis of IBM A␤ and PHF-tau is not known.

Accumulation of Cellular Prion Protein (PrP c ) and

Prion-mRNA (PrP c -mRNA)

In normal human muscle biopsies, cellular prion protein (PrP c ) and its mRNA are localized at the postsynaptic domain of neuromuscular junctions (NMJs) (43,44). Within s-IBM abnormal muscle fibers, there are both PrP immunoreactive inclusions (45) and increased PrP c -mRNA (44), but these abnormalities do not occur in AD brain. In IBM muscle fibers the abnormally accumulated PrP, which colocalizes with both A␤ and tau, probably results, at least partly, from locally increased transcription of PrP c . The cause and consequences of the PrP c mRNA increase and PrP c accumulation in IBM are not known (see below for considerations).

PrP c is considered the precursor of the scrapie agent, namely, prion protein scrapie, PrP sc (46). Previously, the only abnormal human tissue in which PrP and its mRNA have been studied were brains of patients with prion diseases associated with PrP sc ; they did not have increased PrP c mRNA, nor did brains of scrapie-infected animals (46). Therefore, our findings in IBM muscle contrast with those of prion brain diseases. The increased PrP c -mRNA in IBM abnormal muscle fibers identifies the first (to our knowledge) human disease manifesting increased PrP c -mRNA.

␣-Synuclein

Missense mutations in the ␣-synuclein gene are linked to some forms of familial Parkinson disease (24). ␣-Synuclein is an important component of Lewy bodies in several neurodegenerative diseases and of glial and neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions in multiple-system atrophy (24). Its role in AD remains controversial (24). In IBM, ␣synuclein is accumulated in about 60% of A␤-positive abnormal muscle fibers and it colocalizes with A␤ (47).

␣-Synuclein can bind to A␤ and stimulate its aggregation (24). In vitro, ␣-synuclein can self-aggregate to form amyloid (24). We postulate that in IBM muscle fibers ␣-synuclein might bind to previously accumulated A␤ and in turn could ''attract'' additional A␤ to bind, thereby accelerating the fibrillogenesis (47). We have also demonstrated that cultured normal human muscle contains ␣-synuclein and its mRNA (47).

Other Proteins

IBM abnormal muscle fibers also contain accumulations of ubiquitin, ␣1-antichymotrypsin, and basic fibroblast growth factor (4, 6, 7), all of which are also accumulated in AD brain. Recently, ␣B-crystallin was shown to be overexpressed in IBM abnormal muscle fibers and in several other muscle diseases (48). Those authors emphasized that in s-IBM, ␣B-crystallin was also overexpressed in a large number of fibers that they considered to be without significant structural abnormalities, and they postulated that ␣B-crystallin may precede other abnormalities in IBM (48). Our studies of IBM muscle biopsies (Broccolini and Askanas, unpublished observations) confirmed that ␣B-crystallin immunoreactivity is increased diffusely or focally in vacuolated fibers and often focally in other fibers. However, in our material, virtually all of the ␣B-crystallin-immunoreactive fibers had definite, prominent or subtle, structural abnormalities evident on Engel-Gomori trichrome staining (11) performed on adjacent sections (Fig. 4). ␣B-crystallin belongs to the group of small heat shock proteins (hsp's), of which ␣Bcrystallin and Hsp27 are accumulated within AD plaques (49). Because both ␣B-crystallin and Hsp27 are molecular chaperones able to prevent aggregation of other proteins, it was proposed that overexpression of hsp's in AD might be a defense response attempting to diminish A␤fibril formation (49). But, treatment of neurons in culture with ␣B-crystallin intensified the toxic influence of A␤   on them, which was suggested to be through formation of toxic A␤/␣B-crystallin aggregates (49). In IBM, it is not known whether ␣B-crystallin intensifies or diminishes the detrimental influence of A␤ or plays other roles. Its association, in IBM and in several other muscle diseases with abnormalities of muscle-fiber structure, especially involving myofibrils, suggests that its presence in them is secondary.

OUR CURRENT CONCEPTS OF THE IBM PATHOGENIC CASCADE General Considerations

We have proposed that the IBMs are multifactorial and multigenetic (4,6,7). The direct causes are not known. In s-IBM, the etiologic factor might be related to a virus, and/or immune alteration, or other causes, but none has been proven. In the different forms of h-IBM, the causes are the respective abnormal genes. Because s-IBM and the h-IBMs have several characteristic pathologic features in common, we postulated that in the IBMs different etiologies lead to a downstream common pathologic cascade, which is ultimately responsible for the characteristic vacuolar muscle-fiber degeneration (4, 6, 7). Aging factors, later and earlier ones, respectively, may be an important component in both s-and h-IBM. s-IBM typically appears in persons over age 50, and in h-IBM a genetic defect existing since fertilization does not usually manifest itself until the 2nd or 3rd decade (see below).

We have previously proposed that increased expression of several genes is at least one component underlying the demonstrated increase of the respective IBM-characteristic proteins (4,6,7). It is possible that 1 muscle-fiber ''master-gene'' product (protein) might start a detrimental cascade by serving, directly or indirectly, as a transcription factor activating genes for at least some of the ''IBM-proteins'' (4,6,7). A putative master-gene itself might be activated by a viral gene product.

Overexpression of A␤PP/A␤ May Be an Early Step in IBM Pathogenesis

We hypothesize the following: 1) In the common pathogenic cascade of s-and h-IBMs, a key early up-stream element is abnormal signal-transduction and transcription leading to A␤PP overexpression. 2) The resultant overexpressed A␤PP, either directly or by its catabolic product soluble A␤, induces various abnormalities including oxidative stress, which can augment abnormal signal transduction and transcription, creating a self-perpetuating destructive mechanism. Aspects of the IBM pathogenic cascade we propose are illustrated in Figures 5 and 6.

Putative Mechanisms of Increased A␤PP Transcription in IBM:

The A␤PP gene promoter contains several regulatory sequences, one of which is a region homologous to the activator protein-1 (AP1) recognition sequences (50). AP1 is a dimeric complex of transcription factors formed by homodimers of Jun protein, heterodimers of Jun and Fos proteins, or heterodimers of Jun with other proteins that can associate through leucine zipper domains (50,51). c-Jun, the major constituent of the AP1 complex, is a phosphoprotein whose DNA-binding and transactivation properties are regulated by phosphorylation (51). Jun N-terminal kinases 1 and 2 (JNK1/2), are members of the stress-activated protein kinases (SAPKs). They are able to catalyze c-Jun N-terminal phosphorylation), which then induces c-Jun binding to the promoters of various target genes (52). Several factors increase A␤PP-mRNA levels in neuronal and astroglial cell lines, possibly through their ability to induce c-Jun and c-Fos expression and their activation (50)(51)(52). In a human astroglial cell line, A␤PP gene transcription is stimulated through the activation of protein kinase C (PKC), resulting in increased expression of c-Jun homodimers (50). In addition to PKC and JNK, ERK indirectly induces transcription of the A␤PP gene through increased transcription of c-Jun and c-Fos and their activation (51,52). Moreover, c-Jun is positively autoregulated by its product c-Jun/AP1 (51,52), and c-Jun-mRNA is induced by exposure to A␤ (51,52). c-Jun, c-Fos, and ERK are increased in IBM muscle fibers (30,34). We have recently demonstrated that 80%-90% of IBM abnormal muscle fibers have strong focal accumulations of c-Jun, and to a lesser extent of c-Fos, both colocalizing with A␤ and phosphorylated tau (30). Colocalized in the same IBM-abnormal muscle fibers, c-Jun accumulation corresponded to the increased A␤PP mRNA (Fig. 3), suggesting that c-Jun may be involved in A␤PP overproduction in IBM (Broccolini and Askanas, unpublished observations). Of IBM abnormal muscle fibers, 80%-90% contained ERK-immunoreactive inclusions, which colocalized with JNK and A␤ (Wilczynski and Askanas, unpublished observation) and phosphorylated tau (34, and see above). The former suggests that in s-IBM ERK and JNK may participate in induction of the AP-1 transcription complex, which in turn might be involved in abnormal transcription of A␤PP.

Ref-1 is a protein possessing apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease activity (51,53). Ref-1 induces gene transcription by regulating the reduction-oxidation state of conserved cysteine residues in the DNA-binding domain of AP1 (51,53). Through reduction of sulfhydryl groups, Ref-1 increases the affinity of AP1 for its binding site in the promoter region of several target genes, modulating their transcription. By a similar mechanism, Ref-1 enhances binding of the transcription factor NFB to DNA. Oxidative stress induces Ref-1 activation (51,52). In IBM muscle fibers, Ref-1 (53), NFB (54) and markers of oxidative stress (see below) are increased. Our recent studies demonstrated that the Ref-1 immunoreactive inclusions colocalized with A␤ and phosphorylated tau (53), suggesting that Ref-1 might be involved in the increased A␤PP transcription through its modulation of the AP-1 complex binding to the A␤PP gene promoter. In neuronal cells, A␤ can indirectly induce NFB, and NFB by itself can induce A␤PP transcription through its binding to the A␤PP gene promoter (53,54). In IBM abnormal muscle fibers, p50 and p65 subunits of NFB  are strongly accumulated in both PHFs and 6-10 nm fibrils (54), suggesting that NFB might be involved in a detrimental ''vicious circle'' as part of the IBM pathogenic cascade. IL-1␤ and IL-6, which are increased in IBM muscle (4,6), can, in various in vitro models, also stimulate A␤PP transcription (51,52). This is postulated to occur through the increase of a PKC signaling pathway and the subsequent response of the distal AP-1 site (51,52). RNA polymerase II is increased in IBM abnormal fibers (55) as another sign suggesting increased transcription activity.

The initial sparkling event activating the putative A␤PP/A␤-mediated pathogenic cascade is still not known. In s-IBM we have proposed a virus-induced mechanism, but this remains to be proven. Because only a small percent of aging persons develop s-IBM, there could a human strain-susceptibility to either viral infectivity or viral-induced overexpression of A␤PP, e.g. by a viral protein acting directly or indirectly on the enhancer/ promoter of the A␤PP gene, or on an earlier-upstream pre-A␤PP mechanism (discussed immediately above). This could be analogous to the strain-susceptibility of the IBM and Alzheimer models of A␤PP transgenic mice (56,57). An association of s-IBM with HLA class II (HLA-DR3) was reported (4,8), and a potential site for an MHC-associated susceptibility gene(s) in the region between HLA-DR and C4 has been suggested (58). An association between senile cardiac amyloidosis, muscle blood-vessel amyloidosis, s-IBM, and the transthyretin (TTR) Val122Ile mutation has recently been reported (59). That TTR mutation was proposed to be a possible susceptibility gene for s-IBM (59). Other possible susceptibility genes should be sought.

A Putative Key Pathogenic Role of Intracellular A␤PP/ A␤ Accumulation in IBM Muscle Fibers: We have proposed a key upstream role of increased intracellular A␤PP/A␤ in the pathogenesis of IBM, and through it causing abnormal signal transduction, modulation of other genes, induction of oxidative stress, and production of mitochondrial and other abnormalities (4, 6, 7). Our hypothesis has received support from several tissue culture studies. 1) Experimental overexpression of A␤PP through direct A␤PP gene transfer (via adenovirus vector) into human normal, rather mature cultured muscle fibers induced several aspects of the IBM pathology, including vacuolization, intracellular congophilia, nuclear PHFs, and abnormal mitochondria (4, 7). 2) In h-IBM cultured muscle fibers, genetically-determined A␤PP overexpression preceded other IBM-like abnormalities (60). 3) In contrast to normal control cultured human muscle, both experimentally and genetically A␤PP-overexpressing cultured muscle fibers had abnormal NMJs and could not become innervated by fetal-rat spinal-cord neurons (61), leading us to postulate that in IBM muscle A␤PP overexpression may be responsible for a ''myogenous denervation'' (61) and for the recently reported NMJ abnormalities (62). The neuromuscular synapse pathology in IBM has a parallel in the synapse pathology of AD (63) which, by analogy with IBM, we propose may reflect an intracellular postsynaptic pathogenic mechanism.

An additional support of our intracellular A␤PP hypothesis of IBM pathogenesis was recently provided by 2 transgenic mouse models overexpressing A␤PP in muscle fibers (56,57). In both models, some aspects of the IBM pathology were produced, including fiber vacuolization, intracellular accumulation of A␤PP, and intracellular amyloid deposits (56,57). These muscle abnormalities were evident only in aging transgenic mice, providing additional evidence that an aging cellular environment is important for the development of IBM. The presumed importance of A␤PP in IBM pathogenesis is summarized in Table 1 and Figures 5 and 6.

By analogy to IBM muscle, we proposed in 1998 (64) that in AD brain intracellular A␤PP/A␤ may be the key mechanism damaging neurons. Even though some investigators still favor the ''extracellular hypothesis'' of A␤ toxicity in AD brain (27,28), a few now favor the hypothesis that an intraneuronal accumulation of A␤ plays a detrimental role (65).

Oxidative Stress as a Possible Factor in the Pathogenic

Cascade of IBM There is increasing evidence that free-radical toxicity may participate in IBM pathogenesis. Indicators of oxidative stress, as well as enzymes participating in the cellular defense against oxidative stress, are accumulated in IBM muscle fibers.

Probable Toxic Mechanisms: Accumulated in abnormal muscle fibers of s-IBM are neuronal (n) and inducible (i) forms of nitric oxide synthase (NOS), which produce NO, leading to the very toxic peroxynitrite, which nitrates the tyrosine groups of proteins forming nitrotyrosine and impairing their functions (4). The nitrotyrosine demonstrated in s-IBM fibers is indicative of NO-induced oxidative stress (4). To our knowledge, s-IBM was the first muscle disease in which NO-induced oxidative stress was demonstrated. An additional indicator of oxidative stress in s-IBM is accumulation in abnormal fibers of malondialdehyde, an abnormal product of lipid peroxidation (4,66). Nuclear factorB (NF-B) and other normal proteins that can be increased by intracellular oxidative stress are also accumulated (4,34,54).

Probable Defense Mechanisms: Superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1), glutathione-peroxidase, catalase and their mRNAs, are increased within IBM abnormal muscle fibers (4). This might be reflecting an attempted protective response to pathologically increased superoxide and other toxic radicals.

The direct causes of intracellular oxidative stress in IBM are not known. Various muscle-fiber proteins are abnormally accumulated in IBM muscle fibers, but the role each plays in the pathogenic cascade is not understood. It is not known whether one of the proteins initiates the cascade causing accumulation of other proteins which then produce oxidative stress, or whether the oxidative stress is an early event that subsequently induces various protein abnormalities. Since A␤ can induce oxidative stress in several experimental models (4), and accumulation of A␤PP/A␤ seems to precede other abnormalities in IBM muscle (4), we have proposed that overproduction of A␤PP and abnormal accumulation of A␤PP/A␤ cause cellular disturbances leading to increased generation of free radicals, resulting in oxidative stress. Our current hypothetical models of the IBM pathogenesis and the pathogenic cascades that we are proposing are illustrated in Figures 5 and 6. In harmony with this hypothesis is our recent demonstration that A␤PP overexpression, produced by A␤PP gene-transfer into cultured normal human muscle fibers, induced increased SOD1 and SOD1-mRNA (6), as well as several other aspects of the IBM phenotype (4). Accordingly, potential therapeutic avenues for IBM could be to reduce free radicals or prevent their formation.

Muscle-Fiber Aging As an Important Factor Possibly

Contributing to the Development of s-IBM s-IBM typically becomes clinically manifest after age 50. The etiologic factor(s?) is not known. We postulate that in s-IBM there are 3 overlapping aspects of musclefiber destruction: 1) lymphocytic inflammation, involving an attack on muscle fibers by cytotoxic T-lymphocytes, which can be fairly prominent during early involvement of a given muscle, presumably causing the slight to moderate amount of muscle-fiber necrosis, but is usually much less evident in mid and later stages; 2) vacuolar degeneration, somewhat less in early stages compared to greater involvement in mid and later stages; and 3) muscle-fiber atrophy, usually resembling denervation atrophy. Although composition of the s-IBM mononuclearcell infiltrates and other aspects of the inflammatory reaction are virtually identical to those of ordinary polymyositis (PM) (see below), in contrast to PM, s-IBM patients as a group respond rather poorly to anti-dysimmune treatment (9,10). This may be because of unresponsiveness of the noninflammatory mechanisms ''2'' and ''3,'' which we propose to be more important in producing the progressive clinical weakness. The specific vacuolar degeneration of muscle fibers occurs only in s-IBM; it is not part of the PM muscle-fiber phenotype, but it does occur in h-IBM, which lacks an inflammatory component. Patients over age 50 with what could be considered ''pure PM'' are rare; virtually all of the older patients with mononuclear-cell inflammation in muscle biopsies have features of s-IBM. We have suggested that the milieu of the aged muscle fiber might modify the provocation of and response to the lymphocytic inflammation (66), and promote development of the IBM-characteristic progressive vacuolar degeneration, and perhaps of myogenous denervation (4,9,66).

Aging changes may predispose to the above-noted mitochondrial abnormalities of IBM (and perhaps those of AD), and there may be a vicious circle between mitochondrial malfunctions and the oxidative stress evident in the cell.

We further postulate that due to the aged muscle-fiber cellular milieu, there may be diminished cellular defense mechanisms caused by either underexpression of ''youthful'' genes encoding beneficial cellular factors, or overexpression of yet-unknown genes encoding toxic cellular factors. Such mechanisms may contribute to muscle-fiber vacuolar-degeneration, atrophy, and cell death. The aging cellular environment may make the muscle fiber preferentially susceptible to a newly invading virus putatively causing s-IBM (4,9,66); or, may be allowing cytopathic manifestation of a virus. Possibly viral DNA-e.g. from a horizontally transmitted exogenous infection, or a vertically transmitted genomic endogenous virus, such as a retrovirus dormant for years, may start to be transcribed in an aged cellular milieu due to aging-related upregulation of a transcription-activating factor or downregulation of a transcription-inhibitor. In principle, this would be analogous to the phenomenon of the HTLV-1 virus acquired in infancy through mother's milk but not becoming clinically pathogenic until the fifth through seventh decade of life. A few s-IBM patients with HTLV-1 infection (4, 66) support a viral hypothesis of s-IBM.

Role of Inflammation and Autoimmunity in IBM Pathogenesis

Mononuclear-cell inflammation is one of the components of s-IBM pathology. The degree of inflammation varies from abundant in the early stages to little or none in the mid and later stages of the disease. The types of mononuclear inflammatory cells are similar to those in  PM, being mainly CD8 ϩ cytotoxic T-cells and some macrophages (4, 8). In both s-IBM and PM there is a predominance of CD45 RO ϩ memory T-cells in endomysial infiltrates (4,8). The cause of the lymphocytic mononuclear-cell inflammation in s-IBM is not known. Even though it has been recently reported that the type of Tcell response suggests it is antigen-induced (4,8), in neither s-IBM nor PM is a putative antigen(s?) known. Considerations include an antigen of a yet-unidentified virus (e.g. a human endogenous retrovirus [HERV] [67] or other virus), an auto-antigen, or a superantigen phenomenon (9,67). Other aspects of the immune and inflammatory reactions in s-IBM have recently been reviewed (4,8,67). (In AD brain, there is no lymphocytic inflammatorycell component; what some call an ''inflammatory-cell reaction'' consists only of macrophages.) Expression of Fas in muscle fibers and of Fas and Fasligand in infiltrating mononuclear cells was demonstrated in both s-IBM and PM (4,8). Even though an increase of Fas usually renders a cell susceptible to apoptosis (4,8), there is no evidence of apoptosis in muscle fibers of either s-IBM or polymyositis (4,6). Fas-positive muscle fibers in both s-IBM and polymyositis were also expressing Bcl-2, an apoptosis-inhibiting protein (4,8). Accumulation of SMN (40) and of PA-1 antigen (68) may also protect IBM muscle fibers from apoptosis.

Hypothesized ''Junctionalization'' of Nonjunctional Regions of Muscle Fibers

Most of the accumulated ''IBM proteins'' and the increased ''IBM mRNAs'' are, in normal mature muscle fibers, found only at the postsynaptic region of the NMJs (34,47,53,69). (Tau is the only ''IBM protein'' so far not found to be accumulated at normal NMJs [69].) The normal phenomenon of protein and mRNA accumulation postsynaptically at the NMJ we have termed junctionalization (4,7,9,69). It is induced by the contacting motor neuron axonal tip and presumably is governed, at least partially, by enhanced expression, within the junctional (subsynaptic) myonuclei, of the genes of those ''IBM proteins'' and other junctional proteins. A ''junctionalizing master-gene'' and master transcription factor have been proposed as a controller of the junctional-protein genes. During normal NMJ development, there is concurrent downregulation of those junctional-protein genes in the nonjunctional nuclei located throughout the muscle fiber other than at the NMJ. Because most of the proteins (except tau) that accumulate in the IBMs in the form of inclusions scattered nonjunctionally throughout the abnormal muscle fibers are normal junctional proteins, we proposed that in s-and h-IBM there is junctionalization of nonjunctional regions of the muscle fibers caused by reactivated expression of junction-protein genes in the nonjunctional nuclei. This junctionalization could possibly be induced, directly or indirectly, by a protein product of a virus in s-IBM or of a mutated gene(s) in h-IBMboth perhaps abetted by reactive oxygen species and aged-milieu factors.

Possible Relevance of Morpho-Chemical Similarities between IBM Muscle and AD Brain

Because the same proteins accumulate within IBM muscle fibers as accumulate in the brain of sporadic and hereditary forms of AD (Table 2), the muscle and the brain diseases might share certain pathogenic steps-and knowledge of one disease might help elucidate the other. Cellular aging and evidence of oxidative stress are associated with IBM and AD (4,33,66). The IBMs and the ADs (including sporadic and hereditary forms of both groups) are both multifactorial and polygenetic. The respective cascades of events leading to the similar pathologic aspects are not understood. Within both the IBM and the AD categories, the pathologic phenotypes of sporadic and hereditary forms are very similar, despite different direct causes being mainly nongenetic versus mainly genetic. Therefore, in each disease category it has been proposed, by ourselves in the IBMs (7,66) and by others in AD (70), that different etiologies, including different genetic defects in the hereditary forms, lead to the same upstream step which then promotes the downstream final common pathogenic cascade of events resulting in the specific cellular deterioration. Yet each disease category remains organ-specific, involving postmitotic-muscle fibers or postmitotic-neurons. IBM patients do not develop dementia and AD patients do no have the muscle weakness characteristic of IBM, indicating that the mechanism of organ targeting is different in IBM and AD. The tissue affected, muscle versus brain, may be influenced by 1) etiologic agent (a virus?); 2) previous exposure to an environmental factor(s); and/or 3) the patient's genetic background (the cellular microclimate).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Studies described in this review were supported in part by the National Institutes of Health (grants NS31836, NS34103 and AG16768), the Muscular Dystrophy Association, the Alzheimer Foundation, and the Helen Lewis, Sheldon Katz, and Ron Stever Research Funds. We thank our research team colleagues R.B. Alvarez, J. McFerrin, A. Broccolini, G.M. Wilczynski, E. Sarkozi, C.-C. Yang, M. Mirabella, M. Bilak, K. Haginoya, S. Baque ´, and P. Serdaroglu, who participated in various studies described. Maggie Baburyan provided excellent technical assistance in electronmicroscopy and photography.

Fig. 1 .1Fig. 1. Light-microscopic diagnostic features of sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM) muscle biopsy. A, B: Engel-Gomori trichrome staining demonstrating vacuolated muscle fibers and mononuclear-cell inflammation. C: Characteristic squiggly inclusions stained with SMI-31 antibody in 3 abnormal muscle fibers. D, F: Congo-red staining visualized through Texas-red filters and epifluorescence illumination shows mainly squiggly, and some ''plaquette,'' amyloid deposits within abnormal muscle fibers. Part (G) is the same as part (F), but visualized through a green FITC filter system; Congo red appears orange. A, B, D-G: ϫ1,250; C: ϫ950. (Note: none of the figures (1-4) are computer-enhanced.)

Fig. 2 .2Fig. 2. Electronmicroscopic features of s-IBM muscle. A-D: Clusters of paired helical filaments (PHFs). A: In a muscle biopsy fixed en block. B-D: In fixed sections of a fresh-frozen muscle biopsy (method reviewed in ref 6). E: Horseradishimmunoperoxidase, demonstrating dark reaction-product with PHF-1 antibody covering PHFs exclusively, whereas the adjacent portion of the myofiber is not immunostained; PHF-1 antibody (gift from Dr. Peter Davies) recognizes AD phosphorylated tau. F: Cluster of 6-10 nm filaments. A: ϫ43,000; B, D: ϫ87,000; C: ϫ110,000; E, F: ϫ46,000.

Fig. 4 .4Fig. 4. Engel-Gomori trichrome staining (A, C) and ␣B-crystallin-immunoreactivity (B, D) on adjacent sections. Increased ␣B-crystallin staining corresponds to structural abnormalities in the central regions of the fibers (A, C). B: ϫ1,250; C, D: ϫ950.

Fig. 5 .5Fig. 5. A␤PP and A␤ inclusion-body myositis.

Fig. 6 .6Fig. 6. sIBM: proposed causes of muscle-fiber damage, in an aging milieu.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jnen/article/60/1/1/2917922 by University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign user on 05 March 2023

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jnen/article/60/1/1/2917922 by University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign user on 05 March 2023INCLUSION-BODY MYOSITISJ Neuropathol Exp Neurol,Vol 60, January, 2001    

TABLE 11Evidence That A␤PP, and/or Its A␤ Fragment isImportant in the IBM Pathogenic Cascade1. Abnormal accumulation of A␤PP epitope appears to pre-cede other abnormalities in IBM muscle (4).2. A␤PP overexpression by direct A␤PP-gene transfer intorather mature normal cultured human muscle fiber inducesseveral aspects of the IBM phenotype (reviewed in 4).3. h-IBM muscle fibers in culture express several aspects ofthe IBM phenotype, preceded by accumulation of A␤PPepitopes (60).4. Overexpression of A␤PP in muscle of transgenic mice in-duces aspects of the IBM phenotype (56, 57).

TABLE 2 Phenotypic2Comparison between IBM Muscle and AD Brain IN IBM, the autoradiographic localization of the increased mRNAs within the affected muscle fibers is mainly diffuse, and only rarely focal, whereas the abnormally increased and accumulated proteins are usually localized to specific subcellular pathologic structures.Cellular phenotypeIBM, in muscle fibers our dataAD, in brain literaturePlaquettes, 6-10 nmSquiggles, PHFsfilamentsintra-cellularCongophilia''Plaquettes''SquigglesPlaques, extra-cellular; tangles, intra-cellularA␤Yes, 6-10 nmNoPlaques, 6-8 nm filamentsOther A␤PP epitopesYesNoYesA␤PP-mRNA 751, increasedYes*Yes (disputed)Phosphorylated tauNoSquiggles, PHFsTangles, PHFs␣ 1 -ACTYesYes␣ 1 ACT-mRNANoNo, neurons; Yes, astrocytesUbiquitinYesYesYes, plaques and tanglesApoEYesYesYes, plaques and tanglesPresenilin-1YesYesYes␣-SynucleinYesYesJNK 1, 2YesYesERKYesYesYesCDK5YesYesRNAYesYesSMNYesRef-1YesYesYesNF-BYesYesYesc-JunYesYesYesInterleukins 1␤, 6YesYesYesSOD1, SOD1-mRNAYes; Yes*Yes; YesGPX, GPX-mRNAYes; Yes*Yes; YesCATALASE (CAT), CAT-YesYesmRNAYes*YesHO-1, HO-1-mRNAYes; ?Yes; YesNitrotyrosineYesYesYesnNOSYesYesYesiNOSYesYesYesMalondialdehydeYesYesPrP cYesYesNonePrP c -mRNAYes*YesNone*

