Report of a patient with inclusion body myositis and CD8<sup>+</sup> chronic lymphocytic leukaemia - post-mortem analysis of muscle and brain

Report of a patient with inclusion body myositis and CD8 + chronic lymphocytic leukaemia ± post-mortem analysis of muscle and brain.

Sporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM) is a chronic in¯ammatory myopathy, distinguished from other in¯ammatory myopathies by light microscopical muscle biopsy ®ndings of ``rimmed vacuoles''. The diagnostic criterion on ultrastructural level are cytoplasmic inclusions of 15±18 nm diameter tubulo®laments (1). The clinical course is slowly progressive irrespective of immunosuppressive therapy (1).

Several proteins that accumulate in the brain of patients with Alzheimer's disease including b-amyloid, b-amyloid precursor protein, hyperphosphorylated tau, apoE, a 1 -antichymotrypsin, presenilin-1 and ubiquitin as well as prion protein have been identi®ed in muscle ®bres from s-IBM patients (2,3). Moreover, the tubulo®laments in s-IBM morphologically resemble the neuro-®brillary tangles in Alzheimer's disease (3). This has led to speculations on pathogenic analogies between s-IBM and Alzheimer's disease (2,3).

The in¯ammatory in®ltrates in muscle from s-IBM patients have been shown to consist of large numbers of CD8 + T-cells and macrophages suggesting an involvement of a T-cellmediated cytotoxicity mechanism directed against muscle ®bres which express MHC class I molecules (4,5).

The pathogenesis of s-IBM is unknown. One possible mechanism is that s-IBM could be an autoimmune disease and that the autoimmune process leads to in¯ammation and degenerative muscle changes. It is known that chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) is associated with autoimmune disease (6).

In this report we describe a patient with s-IBM who also had T-cell CLL (T-CLL). Post-mortem analysis of brain and muscle tissue was performed in order to elucidate the presence of Alzheimer's changes in the brain and the distribution of muscle ®bre abnormalities, respectively, in a patient with IBM who also had a CD8 + T-CLL.

Case report

The patient, a Caucasian woman, presented at our outpatient clinic at the age of 73 years with a 3-year history of proximal muscle weakness in the lower extremities. She had an 8-year history of progressive dysphagia and 4 years before admittance she was diagnosed with oesophagusdyskinesia and a myotomy of the cricopharyngeus muscle was performed. The same year she had a herpes zoster distributed within the thoracic dermatomes and a cardiac decompensation which was treated with digitalis. Echocardiography did not show any cardiomyopathy. The year before admittance to our clinic a T-CLL, with mainly CD8 + cells, was diagnosed. She had been admitted to the Department of Haematology because of neutropenia and the diagnosis was based on bone marrow aspiration and peripheral blood samples using ¯ow cytometry analyses. In peripheral blood 79% of the cells were lymphocytes and of these 95% were T-lymphocytes. Immunophenotype: CD3 + , CD5 + , CD2 + , CD7 x , CD8 + , CD4 x . No lymph node enlargement was noticed, chest X-ray was normal, and the spleen and liver were both found to be normal.

Clinical examination

Clinical examination revealed a cognitive intact woman. She had a facial muscle weakness, and slight dysarthria. Furthermore, she exhibited weakness of the neck ¯exors as well as proximal muscle weakness and atrophy of the lower extremities. She was able to stand on her toes and heels but was unable to rise from a chair. There was no weakness in the upper extremities. Tendon re¯exes at the knees were absent, and weak at the ankles. Sensory function was normal. Creatine kinase (CK) was 612 IU/l (normal <200 IU/l).

Electrophysiological examination

Electrophysiological examination, including determination of nerve conduction velocity and electromyography showed spontaneous activity in the quadriceps muscle along with polyphasic motor units of small amplitude as seen in primary myositis. There were no signs of polyneuropathy.

Muscle biopsy

Muscle biopsy was performed in m. tibialis anterior on two occasions and the same histopathological abnormalities were found in both. They consisted of a variation in ®bre sizes with normal sized muscle ®bres and atrophic ®bres with both rounded and angulated shape, centrally located nuclei and in¯ammatory in®ltrates distributed in the endomysium surrounding and partially invading nonnecrotic muscle ®bres (Fig. 1a). Rimmed vacuoles were found in muscle ®bres of normal size and in atrophic ®bres (Fig. 1b). The muscle biopsies showed a positive immunostaining for CD8 + lymphocytes. Electron micrographs showed a loss of myo®laments (Fig. 2a). The intermyo®brillar space was increased and ®lled with vacuoles of various sorts, glycogen granules and numerous mitochondria, many of them bizarrely shaped. Autophagic vacuoles containing myelin bodies just beneath the plasma membrane, corresponded to the rimmed vacuoles seen on light microscopy. In the cytoplasmic vacuoles, ®lamentous inclusions with a diameter of 15±18 nm were found (Fig. 2b).

Clinical course

A further progress of her muscle weakness and swallowing problems was seen over the next years. She had a generalized muscle weakness involving upper extremities as well and weight loss. She did not show any signs of dementia. She did not respond to corticosteroid treatment, therefore i.v gammaglobulin (15 g i.v daily for 5 days) treatment was started and repeated three times. However, there was no clinical improvement and the patient died in a clinical picture of a general cachexia 4 years after admittance to the clinic.

Post-mortem analysis

Post-morten analysis included examination of the brain and skeletal muscle. The formaldehyde ®xed brain weighed 1250 g. A mild to moderate atrophy of the gyri was present, most prominent in the pre-and postcentral gyri. Mild atherosclerotic changes of the arteries were seen. On the cut surface no focal changes were noticed. Microscopy in silver impregnated sections revealed a few diffuse plaques in different cortical regions and occasionally neuritic plaques. In CA1 of the hippocampus, the subiculum and entorhinal cortex, some tangles were demonstrated. Congophilic angiopathy was not present. The brainstem, cerebellum and spinal cord were without pathological changes.

In a large post-mortem muscle specimen from m. tibialis anterior and m. quadriceps the histopathological abnormalities had a patchy distribution throughout the muscle and a severe fascicular atrophy was seen (Fig. 1c).

Discussion

The aetiology of s-IBM is unclear. The immunopathological ®ndings suggest an immune-mediated mechanism. The in¯ammatory in®ltrates in muscle from s-IBM patients have been shown to consist of CD8 + lymphocytes and macrophages suggesting an involvement of a T-cell mediated cytotoxicity mechanism directed against muscle ®bres which express MHC class I molecules (4,5). These ®ndings and reports of association with other immune disorders (5,7) support the notion that IBM is an autoimmune disease.

Our patient had s-IBM and a low malignant CD8 + T-CLL. An association of CLL and lymphoma with autoimmune disease is well known (6,8). An autoimmune disease may precede development of lymphoma (8). There is, e.g. an increased risk of developing lymphoma in Hashimoto's thyroiditis (9), which is an autoimmune disease with a defect in the function of thyroid-speci®c suppressor (CD8 + ) T-cells. Abdul-Rahman et al. in 1996 (9) described a case with autoimmune thyroiditis (Hashimoto's) and T-cell lymphoma with an immunophenotype commonly associated with HTLV-1 positive-adult T-cell leukaemia/lymphoma. The tumour cells were negative for CD7, a feature usually associated with HTLV-1 positive lymphomas, although the patient was serologically negative for HTLV-1 and had never visited endemic areas (9). Cupler et al. in 1996 (10) described a patient with IBM which was infected with HTLV-1. Their conclusion was that the virus did not infect the muscle, but that the retroviral infection had provided superantigenic stimulation and triggered an endomysial in¯ammatory response. The leukaemia T-cells in our patient were also negative for CD7. Thus it is tempting to speculate that there could be a connection between s-IBM and the CLL in this patient. One could also consider the possibility of leukaemic in®ltration in the musculature. However, the histopathological changes in the muscle biopsy consisted of in¯ammatory in®ltrates distributed in the endomysium surrounding and partially invading non-necrotic ®bres and rimmed vacuoles and ®lamentous inclusions with a diameter of 15±18 nm were found by electron microscopy. These muscle biopsy changes ful®lled the diagnostic criteria for de®nite s-IBM (11) and had no sign of leukaemic in®ltration.

The abnormal accumulation of amyloid and prion protein in the muscle of IBM patients suggest a degenerative mechanism. Findings of the same proteins in muscle of IBM patients and in the brain of Alzheimer patients might indicate pathogenic analogies between these diseases and there has been a discussion of whether or not the degenerative ®ndings seen in muscle in IBM patients would be found in the central nervous system. However, the post-mortem analysis of the brain in the present patient showed only a few diffuse plaques in different cortical regions and occasionally neuritic plaques, changes which are not compatible with Alzheimer's disease. The results from the postmortem analysis of the brain of the present patient does not support a coupling between IBM and Alzheimer's disease. However, the observations are based on a single patient, and thus, do not allow a general conclusion. We believe that the question should be further elucidated by further postmortem studies in IBM patients.

Although the main ®ndings in muscles of IBM patients are myopathic, neurogenic ®ndings have been reported both in muscle biopsies, on electrophysiological examination and nerve biopsies (1, 12±14). In the present patient, muscle biopsies showed mainly myopathic ®ndings. However, there were scattered atrophic muscle ®bres and on the large post-mortem muscle specimen there was a severe fascicular atrophy. These ®ndings are commonly regarded as neurogenic and point to a neurogenic component in IBM. 

Acknowledgements

Supported by grants from the Swedish Medical Research Council (proj. 3875), Swedish Society of Neurologically Disabled and the Karolinska Institute.

Fig. 1 .1Fig.1. Muscle biopsy cross-section from the tibialis anterior muscle, stained with hematoxylin±eosin. In a) note the variation in muscle ®bre sizes and in¯ammatory in®ltrate and in b) note atrophic muscle ®bres and a ®bre with a rimmed vacuole (arrow). In c), which is a post-mortem specimen from lower limb muscle, note the fascicular atrophy. In a and b bar=0.02 mm and in c bar=0.1 mm.

Fig. 2 .2Fig.2. Electron micrography from the tibialis anterior muscle. In a) there are a loss of myo®laments and a few myelin ®gures and in b) there are myelin bodies (MB) and ®lamentous inclusions (F) with a diameter of 15±18 nm. Bar=1 mm.

