Increased Expression of the Normal Cellular Isoform of Prion Protein in Inclusion-Body Myositis, Inflammatory Myopathies and Denervation Atrophy

The cellular isoform of the prion protein (PrP c ) is a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored glycoprotein, normally expressed in neural and non-neural tissues, including skeletal muscle. In transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, or prion diseases, PrP c , which is soluble in nondenaturing detergent and sensitive to proteinase K (PK)-treatment, represents the molecular substrate for the production of a detergent-insoluble and PK-resistant isoform, termed PrP Sc .

In human prion diseases, PrP Sc accumulation occurs only in brain tissues, with the exception of new variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, where PrP Sc is also detected in lymphoid tissues.

Increased amounts of prion protein expression and deposition have been described in pathological muscle fibers of two human muscle disorders, called sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM) and hereditary inclusion-body myopathy, but it is unknown whether accumulated prion protein reflects normal PrP c or PrP Sc .

We investigated the biochemical characteristics of prion protein in normal human muscle, s-IBM, other inflammatory myopathies and denervation atrophy.

We report that 1) both the glycoform profile and size of the normal muscle PrP c are different from those of human brain PrP c ; 2) in addition to s-IBM, increased PrP c expression is seen in polymyositis, dermatomyositis and neurogenic muscle atrophy, but PrP c glycoforms are unchanged; 3) only the normal PrP c isoform, and not PrP Sc , is detected in s-IBM.

The present results exclude that s-IBM is a prion disease.

Introduction

The cellular prion protein (PrP c ) is a glycolipidanchored sialoglycoprotein highly expressed in neurons, but present in many tissues, including striated muscle and lymphocytes (6,9,21).

In transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSE), or prion diseases, an aberrant conformational isoform of PrP c , called PrP Sc , characterized by resistance to proteolysis and insolubility in nondenaturing detergents, accumulates in brains of affected individuals (20,22).

In humans, TSE can have a genetic, infectious, or sporadic origin. In inherited forms of TSE, the formation of PrP Sc is secondary to the structural instability of mutated prion protein, whereas in sporadic and infectious forms PrP Sc is derived from PrP c by a posttranslational mechanism involving a conformational modification (10). Genetic susceptibility to sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, the most common human TSE, is conferred by homozygosity at codon 129 of the prion protein gene (PRNP), a site of methionine/valine polymorphism (19).

Askanas and coworkers have shown increased expression of the prion protein in muscles of patients with sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM) and hereditary inclusion-body myopathy (h-IBM) (2,3,25). These disorders are pathologically characterized by vacuolated fibers containing collections of paired-helical filaments (PHF) and amyloid fibrils, due to accumulation of prion protein, amyloid ␤ (A␤) protein, hyperphosphorylated tau and other proteins found in brain of Alzheimer's disease (3,11). In s-IBM, a number of mononuclear cell infiltrates are also present.

Analyses of the coding region of PRNP gene have excluded mutations in h-IBM (1,14). In addition, in s-IBM the frequency analyses of allelic variants at codon 129 are similar to healthy controls (12,18), although a recent study suggests a possible linkage between methionine homozygosity at codon 129 and s-IBM (16).

Despite assessed evidence of PrP deposition in amyloid fibrils, s-IBM and h-IBM remain to be classified as prion diseases, since the resistance of the PrP to PKtreatment has not be determined.

The present study investigates the biochemical properties of PrP in skeletal muscle from patients with s-IBM and other myopathies.

Materials and Methods

Source of tissues.

We studied quadriceps muscle biopsies of 28 patients, aged 39 to 64 years, with the following diagnoses: s-IBM, 10; dermatomyositis (DM), 4; polymiositis (PM), 3; amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), 3; denervation atrophy (DA), 3; normal controls, 5.

Peripheral blood leukocytes (PBL) were isolated from three healthy individuals. Brain tissues were obtained at autopsy. After collection, all samples were stored at -80°C.

Muscles from all patients with s-IBM had vacuolated muscle fibers and ultrastructural inclusions typical of the disorder. Inflammatory infiltration was abundant only in two cases of s-IBM, whereas it was minimal in the remaining s-IBM muscle biopsies.

No tissues from h-IBM were available for the present study.

Immunohistochemistry. Ten-m cryosections were air-dried, fixed in 3,7% formalin and acetone, incubated with 0.3% hydrogen peroxide in methanol, and rehydrated in phosphate buffered saline (PBS). After blocking with 10% normal goat serum, PrP was detected by overnight incubation at 4°C, with monoclonal antibodies 8H4 (1:1,000), against residues 145-167 (29). Subsequent antibody detection was carried out using biotinylated horse anti-mouse IgG and Vectastain ABC-Elite kit (Vector). Diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride was used to visualize the immunoreactivity. Immunohistochemical controls included omission of the primary antibody.

Protein studies and immunoblotting. Tissues were homogenized in 9 volumes of lysis buffer (100 mM NaCl, 10 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM Tris, pH 7.4) and aliquots were digest-ed with PK (Boehringer-Mannheim) for 30 minutes at 37°C (final concentration of 5 and 20 g/ml). Digestions were blocked by the addition of 2 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF). Samples were deglycosylated with recombinant peptide N-glycosidase F (PNGase F) according to manifacturer's instructions (Boehringer Mannheim).

The equivalent of 0.3 mg of wet tissue per well was loaded onto a 12% polyacrylamide gel. After resolution, samples were transferred to PVDF membranes (Immobilon P, Millipore) for 2 hours at 60V. Membranes were incubated overnight at 4°C with anti-PrP monoclonal antibodies 5B2 (1:1,000), against residues 23-40 (29), 3F4 (1:50,000, Chemicon), and 8H4 (1:5,000). The blots were developed by using the enhanced chemiluminescence system (Amersham). Densitometric values for each sample and the relative amounts of different PrP glycoforms were obtained with computer-assisted laser scanner (LKB, Ultroscan XL), after correction for background. Quantitative data for each specimen were obtained by comparison of pathological samples with a standard muscle sample. The total amount of PrP, obtained from at least three different samples for each disease group, was expressed in arbitrary units as mean Ϯ standard deviation. Two-tailed Student's test was used for statistical analysis.

Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis.

For isoelectric focusing (IEF), using immobilized pH gradients (IPG) in the first dimension, pre-cast gels with a linear pH range of 3-10 (7-cm-long, DryStrips, Pharmacia) were used. Before IEF, the dry gels were reswollen for 16 hours in 125 l of IPG buffer (8 M urea, 0.3% DTT, 2% Nonidet P-40, and 0.5% Ampholytes) containing 10 l of sample. IEF was carried out at 20°C for 0.5 hour with 500 V, 0.5 hour with 1000 V and 1 hour with 8000 V in a cooled horizontal electrophoresis unit (Multiphor II, Pharmacia). Before the second dimension (SDS-PAGE), the IPG strips were equilibrated for 15 minutes in 50 mmol/L Tris-HCl, 6 mol/L Urea, 30% glycerol, 2% SDS and a trace of bromophenol blue. Immunoblotting was performed as described above.

Results

PrP accumulates in vacuolated muscle fibers of s-IBM and atrophic fibers of inflammatory myopathies and denervated muscles.

Immunostaining of normal human muscles showed faint positivity over the entire perimeter of all fibers (Figure 1A), with focal accumulation at the peripheral sarcoplasm in occasional fibers, which corresponded to subsynaptic sarcoplasm of the neuromuscular junction. In addition, PrP immunoreactivity was observed on some endomysial vessels and interstitial cells. In PM and DM, PrP deposition was seen in inflammatory cells and atrophic muscle fibers, as a diffuse sarcoplasmic positivity with peripheral rim. In DA (Figure 1B) and SLA (Figure 1C, D), only atrophic muscle fibers showed an increased PrP staining. In s-IBM muscles, PrP immunoreactivity was detected on vacuolated muscle fibers, in addition to round and angulated atrophic fibers, as a diffuse sarcoplasmic staining or sarcolemmal enhancement (Figure 1E, F).

PrP C isoforms in normal human muscle, leukocytes, and brain. Immunoblot of normal muscle PrP c

with 5B2, against residues 23-40, showed a prominent band migrating at ~30 kDa (Figure 2a, lane 1), representing monoglycosylated PrP c , as deduced by the relative molecular mass (Mr). Surprisingly, the anti-N antibody disclosed a less intense staining of highly glycosylated PrP c species that were, however, clearly detected with antibodies directed to the C-terminus. Differently from anti-N antibody, the 3F4 showed two major PrP c glycoforms migrating at ~34 and 30 kDa, in the absence of detectable unglycosylated protein (Figure 2a, lane 2). Enzymatic deglycosylation reduced PrP c species to a 26-kDa zone, and to a minor band at ~20 kDa, representing amino-truncated fragments (Figure 2a, lane 3). Immunoblots reacted with 3F4, after 2D-PAGE, showed several charge isomers migrating at ~30-34 kDa, pI 4-7, in addition to a train of spots at 29-30 kDa, pI 4-5.5 (Figure 2b). The latter glycoforms, by homology with results obtained with normal brain (see below), likely represent highly glycosylated PrP c forms of the 20-kDa truncated fragment.

Based on the presence of PrP-positive mononuclear cell infiltrates in muscle biopsies of s-IBM, DM and PM, we characterized PrP c in peripheral leukocytes, with the aim of assessing detectable differences with muscle PrP c .

Immunoblot analysis of PBL with anti-N antibody revealed a major band migrating at ~38 kDa, and minor species at 30 and 26 kDa (Figure 2c, lane 1). Therefore the high-Mr PBL glycoform migrated significantly slower than the corresponding band from muscle. Samples reacted with 3F4 did not show changes in glycoform ratios (Figure 2c, lane 2), indicating that the bulk of PrP c is present under highly glycosylated, full-length protein, as confirmed by the reduction to a unique 26-kDa zone, following deglycosylation (Figure 2c, lane 3). After 2D-PAGE, PrP c glycoforms were resolved in two sets of differently glycosylated charge isomers, migrat-   ). Enzymatic deglycosylation yields the full-length PrP c at 26 kDa and a faint band at ~20 kDa (lane 3). Immunoblot with 3F4 of muscle PrP c , following 2D-PAGE, shows the presence of several charge isomers with apparent Mr of 29-34 and pI ranging from 4-7 (b). Western blot immunodetection of PBL PrP c (c) with 5B2 (lane 1) and 3F4 (lanes 2 and 3). The bulk of PrP c is present as full-length, highly glycosylated protein, migrating at ~38 kDa, and reduced to a 26-kDa zone following PNGase treatment (lane 3). Two main sets of 3F4-reactive PrP glycoforms, with different M r and pI ranges, are detected after 2D-PAGE (d). Immunoblots of normal human brain PrP c (e) with 5B2 (lane 1) and 3F4 (lanes 2 and 3). The 3F4 antibody shows a relative increase in PrP glycoforms lacking the N-terminal residues 23-40, which migrate at ~30 and 27 kDa. PNGase treatment reduces all PrP c bands at ~27 and 20 kDa (lane 3). After 2D-PAGE the 35-kDa band migrates as several charge isomers at the region of pH 5-8, wheras the 27-kDa glycoforms are resolved within pI values of 4-7.

ing at 38 kDa, pI 6-7, and 36-37 kDa, pI 4-6, respectively (Figure 2d).

Immunoblots with 5B2 of normal brain homogenates contained, as expected, a major PrP c band of 35 kDa, a minor band of 30 kDa and an almost undetectable 27-kDa band, corresponding to the high-Mr glycoform, the low-Mr glycoform, and the unglycosylated form, respectively (Figure 2e, lane 1). Samples reacted with 3F4 showed increased signals, as compared to 5B2, at the 30-and 27-kDa zones (Figure 2e, lane 2), due to the detection of glycosylated, amino-truncated PrP c fragments. After enzymatic removal of N-linked glycans, all PrP c species migrated at 27 and 20 kDa (Figure 2e, lane 3). By 2D-PAGE, in addition to full-length PrP c , recog-nized by anti N-antibody (data not shown), and migrating at 35 kDa, pI range 5-8, several charge isomers of truncated PrP at ~30 kDa, pI 4-7, and barely detectable glycoforms of ~27 kDa were observed (Figure 2f).

Increased expression of PrP in s-IBM, inflammatory myopathies and denervated muscles does not alter the glycoform ratios. Immunoblot analyses of s-IBM, inflammatory myopathies and denervated muscles

showed a significant increase in total PrP, as compared to normal muscle (Figure 3a). Quantitation of total PrP showed the following normalized values: normal muscle, 1, s-IBM, 2.9 Ϯ 0.71 (p Ͻ 0.01), ALS 2.1 Ϯ 0.4 (p Ͻ 0.03), DM 1.9 Ϯ 0.3 (p Ͻ 0.03).  In pathologic tissues, the ratio between the high-and low-M r glycoforms was not significantly different from that observed in control muscles.

Taking advantage of the different migration of the high-M r glycoform in PBL, we could assess with confidence that the contribution of inflammatory blood cells to the overall PrP expression in inflammatory myopathies was not significant. Detection of the 38-kDa immunoreactive PrP glycoform was seen only in two cases of s-IBM, having prominent cellular infiltration. Immunoblots reacted with 3F4, after 2D-PAGE, showed that PrP from s-IBM was composed of the same charge isomers encountered in normal muscle (Figure 3b). The more intense signals, as compared to normal muscle (see Figure 2b), reflect increased PrP concentration in samples containing the same amounts of total proteins.

The PrP from s-IBM muscle is sensitive to PKtreatment.

As expected, the prion protein from normal muscle (Figure 3c, lanes 1-3) and brain (Figure 3c, lanes 7-9) was completely digested following PK-treatment. Similar results were obtained with s-IBM (Figure 3c, lanes 4-6) and other pathological conditions here investigated, even with low concentrations of PK. These findings rule out the presence of the PrP Sc isoform in s-IBM.

Examination of brain samples from subjects with sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease disclosed the presence of PK-resistant PrP Sc (data not shown).

Discussion

Although the pathology of prion diseases is limited to neural tissues, evidence has been obtained that, in some human and experimental conditions, peripheral tissues, including muscle (7), may form PrP res , a pathogenic, protease-resistant isoform of the cellular PrP c . In two groups of human disorders, s-IBM and h-IBM, the findings of increased PrP mRNA expression (3,25) and deposition of PrP in pathological muscle fibers (2,3), have suggested that these conditions might represent prion disorders. However no studies have been carried out to assess whether PrP c or PrP res isoforms accumulate in s-IBM and h-IBM.

In the present study we confirmed previous observations of PrP accumulation in vacuolated fibers of s-IBM, and, moreover, we found increased PrP immunoreactivity in atrophic fibers of inflammatory myopathies and neurogenic atrophy. The novel finding of increased PrP expression in atrophic muscle fibers suggests that PrP upregulation is not exclusive of s-IBM. Although atrophic muscle fibers may show unspecific staining with different antibodies as an effect of shrinkage, the specificity of PrP accumulation was confirmed by immunoblot findings and following the detection of occasional PrP-negative atrophic fibers.

Recent studies suggest that PrP c expression parallels modulation of cellular resistance to oxidative stress in skeletal muscle (8). Nitric oxide-induced "oxidative stress" has recently been proposed to have a major pathogenic role in s-IBM (3,28) and in scrapie-infected mouse brains (13), and identified as a possible trigger for the formation of vacuoles in s-IBM (3). The strict correlation between oxidative stress and deposition of A␤, as observed in Alzheimer's disease (4) and Alzheimer transgenic mice (26), may also explain the deposition of abnormal material in s-IBM.

Taken together, these data suggest that oxidative stress may be responsible for accumulation of both A␤ and PrP in s-IBM. Within vacuolated fibers of s-IBM, PrP-positivity was detected in sarcolemma, a site of faint positivity in normal muscles, or as diffuse deposition in the sarcoplasm, which normally lacks of PrP expression.

It has been previously suggested that an infectious or an aberrantly glycosylated form of PrP could be generated in s-IBM (2,3). We characterized muscle PrP c , including the ratio of its glycoforms, and resistance to PK in pathological conditions.

The biochemical composition of PrP c in normal human skeletal muscle has not been studied in detail. We first provide evidence that muscle PrP c differ from normal brain PrP c on the basis of the glycoform ratios and the size of the full-length deglycosylated protein, a disparity apparently not accounted by a different N-terminal truncation. This heterogeneity may be due to tissue-specific co-and post-translational modifications, either in the composition of the GPI-anchor or in the protein.

The increased PrP expression observed in pathological muscle was not accompanied by changes in glycoform ratios, indicating a normal translational and posttranslational processing. Therefore it is unlikely that PrP c abnormal conformers, generated throughout altered glycosylation, a process that may affect protein conformation (17) and disulfide bridge formation (23), plays a role in IBM. Beside the obvious increased transcription, altered transport to the cell surface or impaired degradation of the PrP, are more likely to explain PrP c cellular accumulation in pathological muscle.

Next we asked whether conversion of PrPc into PrPres occurs in s-IBM. Since partial resistance of PrP to PK digestion represents the hallmark of prion diseases, failure to detect PrP res , even with low concentra-tion of protease, makes it unlikely the possibility that patients with s-IBM are infected with prions. The finding is of practical importance, as skeletal muscle may potentially represent a source of contamination, following surgical procedures or eletrophysiological investigations.

To date, myopathic involvement in prion disorders has been reported only in one patient with Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker (GSS) disease carrying a P102L mutation (15,24), and in scrapie (5), a naturally occurring prion disease of sheep. Replication of PrP res in skeletal muscle has been demonstrated only in transgenic mice (7). Based on previous studies, skeletal muscle involvement rarely occurs in mammalian prion disorders.

However, the issue of muscle infectivity in human and animal TSE remains to be addressed. Of particular concern is the lack of studies in bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), a likely source of prions, through consumption of cattle meat products, in people affected with the so-called new variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.

In conclusion, our findings demonstrate that s-IBM is not a prion disease and suggest that increased PrP c transcription is secondary and not pathogenic.

Prior studies have described a neurologic syndrome, combining neuromyopathy and focal spongiform degeneration of the gray matter, in transgenic mice overexpressing PrP-mRNA and PrP c (27). At variance with s-IBM, however, in these animals PrP was selectively overexpressed by 8-fold and myopathic feature consisted in fiber degeneration and phagocytosis. These differences argue that PrP c has a different role in human myopathies and the myopathic transgenic mouse model.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Drs. Man-Sun Sy and Pierluigi Gambetti for monoclonal antibodies 5B2 and 8H4.

This investigation was supported by grants from the Regione Veneto (Ricerca Sanitaria Finalizzata 1997 to TC and Ricerca Sanitaria Finalizzata 1998 to SM).

184G. Zanusso et al: Increased PrP c in Inclusion-Body Myositis

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. Light-microscopic immunocytochemistry of prion protein (PrP) immunoreactivity in human muscle fibers. In normal fibers, PrP is localized at the sarcolemmal membranes and in interstitial cells (A). In denervation atrophy (B) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (C, D), atrophic muscle fibers show increased PrP immunoreactivity.In sporadic inclusion-body myopathy, different degrees of PrP deposition are observed on angulated and round atrophic fibers, vacuolated muscle fibers, and some perivascular inflammatory cells (E, F) (8H4 1:1,000).

Figure 2 .2Figure 2.Western immunoblot patterns of PrP c in normal human muscle (a) following detection with monoclonal antibodies 5B2, recognizing N-terminal PrP residues 23-40 (lane 1), and 3F4 directed to PrP residues 109-112 (lanes 2 and 3). Enzymatic deglycosylation yields the full-length PrP c at 26 kDa and a faint band at ~20 kDa (lane 3). Immunoblot with 3F4 of muscle PrP c , following 2D-PAGE, shows the presence of several charge isomers with apparent Mr of 29-34 and pI ranging from 4-7 (b). Western blot immunodetection of PBL PrP c (c) with 5B2 (lane 1) and 3F4 (lanes 2 and 3). The bulk of PrP c is present as full-length, highly glycosylated protein, migrating at ~38 kDa, and reduced to a 26-kDa zone following PNGase treatment (lane 3). Two main sets of 3F4-reactive PrP glycoforms, with different M r and pI ranges, are detected after 2D-PAGE (d). Immunoblots of normal human brain PrP c (e) with 5B2 (lane 1) and 3F4 (lanes 2 and 3). The 3F4 antibody shows a relative increase in PrP glycoforms lacking the N-terminal residues 23-40, which migrate at ~30 and 27 kDa. PNGase treatment reduces all PrP c bands at ~27 and 20 kDa (lane 3). After 2D-PAGE the 35-kDa band migrates as several charge isomers at the region of pH 5-8, wheras the 27-kDa glycoforms are resolved within pI values of 4-7.

186G. Zanusso et al: Increased PrP c in Inclusion-Body Myositis

Figure 3 .3Figure 3.Western immunoblot analysis of PrP c in muscle homogenates from a control subject (lane 1), and patients with denervation atrophy (lane 2), dermatomyositis (lane 3), and sporadic inclusion-body myositis (lane 4) (a), showing that PrP c expression is increased in all pathological conditions. Immunoblot with 3F4, after 2D-PAGE separation of the sample shown in a, lane 4 (b). Proteinase K treatment of normal human muscle, s-IBM and normal brain. All samples were completely digested in presence of 20 g/ml after 5 and 20 minutes at 37°C (c).

