Macrophagic myofasciitis associated with inclusion body myositis: a report of three cases

We describe three patients with macrophagic myofasciitis and inclusion body myositis. All patients ful®lled diagnostic criteria for inclusion body myositis and myopathologic criteria for macrophagic myofasciitis. In the three cases macrophagic myofasciitis complicated the evolution of a known and painless inclusion body myositis and was diagnosed in a repeated deltoid biopsy because of the appearance of myalgia during the course of inclusion body myositis in all cases. The unexpected appearance of myalgia during the course of painless inclusion body myositis must arouse the suspicion of an association of another in¯ammatory muscle disease, macrophagic myofasciitis.

Introduction

A new type of in¯ammatory myopathy was recently described and recorded with an increasing frequency by the GERMMAD (Groupe d'Etudes et Recherche sur les Maladies Musculaires Acquises et Dysimmunitaires) [1,2]. Since 1993, this condition, called macrophagic myofasciitis (MMF), has been documented in more than 130 patients in France and some other countries. Affected patients usually complained of diffuse myalgia, marked asthenia, arthralgia, and, less often, muscle weakness and fever [3]. Some patients also had evidence of central nervous system involvement [4]. Laboratory investigations inconstantly showed mild elevation of creatine kinase (CK) and electromyogram (EMG). Muscle biopsy showed a unique myopathological pattern characterized by focal in®ltration of epimysium, perimysium and perifascicular endomysium by sheets of large non-epithelioid macrophages, rare CD8 1 T-cells and inconspicuous muscle ®ber damage. The picture is distinctive from in¯ammatory myopathies and fasciitis-panniculitis syndromes [5]. The cause of MMF is likely to be environmental, i.e. infectious or toxic [3,6±9]. It has been suggested that MMF may be an unusual type of Whipple's disease [6] or a complication of vaccinations [7].

We describe three patients with inclusion body myositis (IBM) and associated MMF. In all cases MMF complicated the evolution of a known painless IBM and was diagnosed in a repeated deltoid biopsy because of the appearance of myalgia during the course of IBM in the three patients.

Case reports

Case 1

A 34-year-old male was referred in 1978 for evaluation of progressive muscle weakness. Examination revealed mild lower limb proximal and distal muscle wasting and weakness. His CK level was elevated (15 £ normal), and quadriceps muscle biopsy showed mild in¯ammatory myopathy Despite the intensive therapeutic intervention, there was gradual deterioration in his muscle strength. A deltoid biopsy revealed an in¯ammatory IBM, with endomysial in¯ammation by CD8 1 cytotoxic lymphocytes, invasion of non-necrotic ®bers, eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusions, and rimmed vacuoles within the muscle ®bers. Diagnosis was con®rmed by electron microscopic (EM) demonstration of helical ®laments (Fig. 1). Treatment was stopped, and the disease remained stable for a few years. In 1997, a new degradation of his muscle strength with the appearance of diffuse myalgia led us to a repeat muscle investigations in July 1998. EMG showed myogenic and neurogenic changes, and his muscle enzyme levels were normal. Deltoid muscle biopsy showed the presence of IBM on frozen section associated with characteristic features of MMF on light and electron microscopies (Figs. 2 and 3).  cine and cipro¯oxacine were initiated, with the disappearance of myalgia and stabilization of muscle weakness.

Case 2

A 54-year-old female presented in 1997 with a 6 year history of progressive lower limb weakness and falls. The patient was vaccinated against HVB in March 1996, April 1996, and October 1996. Examination revealed mild dysphagia, upper and lower limb proximal muscle weakness and lower limb distal muscle wasting and weakness, especially of foot extensors. Investigations showed elevated muscle enzymes (CK, 6 £ normal), and myopathic and neuropathic changes on EMG. Quadriceps muscle biopsy revealed speci®c changes of sporadic IBM (s-IBM), with endomysial in®ltration by in¯ammatory cells, eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusions, and rimmed vacuoles (Fig. 4a,b). She was treated with prednisone 1 mg/kg daily for 6 months without clinical improvement except for the disappearance of dysphagia, and her muscle enzyme levels dropped to normal values. The prednisone dose was gradually reduced and then stopped. In October 1998, the gradual deterioration in her muscle strength, the appearance of disabling myalgia and the elevation of CK levels justi®ed a new muscle examination. Deltoid biopsy showed IBM associated with speci-®c changes of MMF. However, re-examination of the ®rst muscle biopsy, performed in 1997, con®rmed the initial presence of IBM, without MMF. PCR-based detection of Tropheryma whippelii from jejunal and muscle biopsy samples was negative. Intravenous gamma globulin and a resistance training program were started with the disappearance of myalgia, stabilization of muscle weakness and reduction of CK levels.

Case 3

A 69-year-old male presented in May 1992 with a 6 month history of progressive lower limb weakness. His past history included a diabetes mellitus. Examination revealed upper and lower limb proximal muscle weakness and lower limb distal muscle wasting and weakness. Investigations showed elevated muscle enzymes (CK, 8 £ normal), and mixed myopathic and neuropathic changes on EMG. Deltoid muscle biopsy revealed characteristic changes of in¯ammatory IBM, con®rmed by EM. The patient was initially treated with oral prednisolone 40 mg daily. His clinical status improved and CK levels dropped, and the prednisolone dose was gradually reduced and then stopped in November 1997. In 1999, he complained of further deterioration with myalgia and was readmitted to hospital. Examination showed myalgia, a characteristic thinning of the forearm muscles associated with weakness and atrophy of the ®nger ¯exors and ankle dorsi¯exors. The quadriceps and the iliopsoas were prominently involved as distal lower limb weakness, especially of foot extensors. The patient received intravenous immunoglobulin, with renal transitory side effects. A repeated deltoid muscle biopsy showed classic changes of IBM, and focal in®ltration of macrophages characteristic of MMF. Routine PCR-based detection of Tropheryma whippelii from jejunal and muscle Fig. 3. Deltoid muscle biopsy, electron microscopy (case 1): a macrophage cytoplasmic process showing aggregates of the dense spicular material, bounded by a membrane, characteristic of MMF ( £ 80 000). biopsy samples was negative. There was no HVB nor HVA vaccinations, and vaccination against tetanus was performed in August 1991, September 1993, and October 1994. A supervised progressive resistance training program and corticosteroids were started, with the disappearance of myalgia and moderate improvement of clinical status.

Discussion

Our three cases are the ®rst reported coincidence of MMF with IBM. All three patients ful®lled diagnostic criteria for IBM [10] and myopathologic criteria for MMF as de®ned by the GERMMAD [1,2]. MMF has been recorded with an increasing frequency in France [3]. Symptoms included myalgias (90%), marked asthenia (90%), arthralgias (65%), muscle weakness (25%), and mild fever (25%). Abnormal laboratory ®ndings included elevated CK levels (30%), a markedly increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (25%), EMG (25%) [3] and signi®cant abnormalities in Gallium-67 scintigraphy [9].

In MMF, muscle biopsy showed a conspicuous in®ltration of connective tissue structures by sheets of large nonepithelioid macrophages, with a ®nely granular Periodic Acid-Schiff (PAS) positive content, appearing as small osmiophilic spiculated structures at electron microscopy. The in®ltrate appears as a contiguous and centripetal extent from fascia to muscle (Fig. 2). Necrosis, epithelioid cells, giant cells and mitotic ®gures were absent. The macrophage in®ltrate was focal or multifocal. Lymphocytic in®ltrates, mainly CD8 1 T-cells, were usually mild.

Electron microscopy showed histiocytic cells without Birbeck granules, containing intracytoplasmic aggregates of ®ne needle-shaped randomly-oriented dense structures forming clusters, often bounded by distinct limiting membranes (Fig. 3).

The picture was easily distinguishable from sarcoid myopathy and fasciitis-panniculitis syndromes. The cause of MMF is likely to be environmental, i.e. infectious or toxic [3]. Among various etiologic tracks, it has been suggested that MMF could represent an unusual type of Whipple's disease [6], or a rare complication of vaccinations [7]. Our three patients received aluminic vaccine (HVB, HVA and tetanus) respectively 5 years, 4 months and 2 years before the appearance of myalgia. The infectious investigations, especially for Whipple's disease, were negative. s-IBM is described as being rarely associated with autoimmune disease [11,12]. IBM has been seen in patients with diseases including scleroderma [13], Sjo Ègren's syndrome [14], immune thrombocytopenic purpura [15], systemic lupus erythematosus [16], dermatomyositis [17,18], rheumatoid arthritis [19] and hypogammaglobulinemia [20]. Some authors suggested a coincidence rate of 15% [21±23].

s-IBM is a rare condition, belonging to the group of idiopathic in¯ammatory myopathies. s-IBM is considered as the most common muscle disease in patients older than age 50, with a male predominance [11]. Patients' muscle biopsies show eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusions, rimmed vacuoles within the muscle ®bers that contain amyloid deposits, and some lymphocytic in®ltrates, as well as partial invasion of MHC class I-expressing, non-necrotic muscle ®bers with cytotoxic CD8 1 T-cells. These CD8 1 T-cells are inconstantly associated with macrophages, with the latter accounting for 20±30% of the in¯ammatory cells [24]. Immunoelectron microscopy studies show that in the early stages of ®ber invasion, macrophages and CD8 1 cells are stickled against or send spike-like processes into non-necrotic muscle ®bers [25]. The macrophages in IBM contain only a few heterophagic vacuoles and therefore act in a cytotoxic rather than phagocytic capacity [25]. However, these macrophages do not contain intracytoplasmic aggregates as seen in MMF.

s-IBM is of an unknown cause and its pathogenesis is still being discussed. For some authors, s-IBM corresponds to an autoimmune disease close to polymyositis [11]. Others have suggested that important contributory factors leading to the IBM muscle ®ber destruction are muscle aging and oxidative stress, putatively induced by the upstream overexpression of b-amyloid precursor protein within abnormal muscle ®bers [12].

Transient mild myalgia are noted occasionally at the beginning or less frequently during the evolution of IBM [24]. Myalgia are generally mild and seem to be present in 20±25% of patients [26±29]. In our patients, MMF complicated in all cases the evolution of a known and painless IBM and was diagnosed with a repeated deltoid biopsy because of the appearance of myalgia. In the repeated biopsy, typical IBM in¯ammatory changes persisted alongside the macrophage in®ltrates. For patients 1 and 2, the ®rst biopsies performed for the initial diagnostic of IBM have been reviewed. In the two cases, MMF was absent at the time of IBM diagnosis. However, in case 2, the muscle biopsies were from different sites.

The direct connection between MMF and IBM remains unclear, but one interpretation of the occurrence of both MMF and s-IBM in our patients suggests a genetic susceptibility to dysimmune muscle disease, perhaps due to defects of presenting cell antigens, especially macrophages. The unexpected appearance of disabling myalgia during the course of classic IBM can evoke the suspicion of another myositis, especially MMF, and justify a new deltoid muscle biopsy.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the GERMMAD. We are most indebted to Professor Bruno Eymard and Dr Eric Gobin for their useful cooperation.

Fig. 1 .1Fig. 1. Deltoid muscle biopsy, electron microscopy (case 1): characteristic feature of the vacuolated muscle ®bers, with the presence of cytoplasmic helical ®laments in IBM ( £ 32 000).

Fig. 2 .2Fig. 2. Deltoid muscle biopsy, light microscopy (case 1): a massive perifascicular in®ltration of slightly basophilic non-epithelioid cells corresponding to macrophages (MMF), associated with characteristic vacuolated muscle ®bers (IBM) (hematoxylin and eosin, £ 70).

Fig. 4 .4Fig. 4. Quadriceps muscle biopsy, light microscopy (case 2): (a) the Engel±Gomori trichome stain shows in¯ammatory in®ltrate and marked variation of cell size; (b) hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections show typical irregular rimmed vacuoles.

