Rimmed vacuoles and the added value of SMI-31 staining in diagnosing sporadic inclusion body myositis

Problems in diagnosing sporadic inclusion body myositis may arise if all clinical features ®t a diagnosis of polymyositis, but the muscle biopsy shows some rimmed vacuoles. Recently, immunohistochemistry with an antibody directed against phosphorylated neuro®lament (SMI-31) has been advocated as a diagnostic test for sporadic inclusion body myositis. The aims of the present study were to de®ne a quantitative criterion to differentiate sporadic inclusion body myositis from polymyositis based on the detection of rimmed vacuoles in the haematoxylin±eosin staining and to evaluate the additional diagnostic value of the SMI-31 staining. Based on clinical criteria and creatine kinase levels in patients with endomysial in®ltrates, 18 patients complied with the diagnosis of sporadic inclusion body myositis, and 17 with the diagnosis of polymyositis. A blinded observer counted the abnormal ®bres in haematoxylin±eosin-stained sections and in SMI-31-stained sections. The optimal cut-off in the haematoxylin±eosin test was 0.3% vacuolated ®bres. Adding the SMI-31 staining signi®cantly increased the positive predictive value from 87 to 100%, but increased the negative predictive value only to small extent. We conclude that (1) patients with clinical and laboratory features of polymyositis, including response to treatment, may show rimmed vacuoles in their muscle biopsy and that (2) adding the SMI-31 stain can be helpful in differentiating patients who respond to treatment from patients who do not.

Introduction

Sporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM) is a chronic in¯ammatory, corticosteroid-resistant myopathy with weakness of both proximal and distal muscles [1±3]. In patients suspected of s-IBM, polymyositis (PM) is part of the differential diagnosis [2,4,5]. As PM is responsive to immunesuppressive treatment and s-IBM generally is not, it is important to differentiate s-IBM from PM in an early stage. Although both diseases differ in age of onset, distribution of weakness and rate of progression, the de®nite diagnosis of s-IBM rests on the muscle biopsy [1±3]. s-IBM is differentiated from PM by the presence of basophilic rimmed vacuoles in non-necrotic muscle ®bres in the haematoxylin±eosin (H&E) staining, whereas endomysial lymphocytic in®ltrates are indistinguishable in both diseases. Diagnostic criteria for s-IBM also include congophilic amyloid deposits, and cytoplasmatic and intranuclear tubulo®laments demonstrated by electron microscopy (EM), but these abnormalities are less abundant and more dif®cult to detect than rimmed vacuoles, especially in a routine clinical setting.

Problems in diagnosis may arise when patients have some, but not all of the typical s-IBM abnormalities [4±7]. For example, in patients presenting with clinical features that suggest s-IBM the muscle biopsy sometimes does not show the characteristic histopathological features. In these patients, a repeated biopsy is required for making the diagnosis. Other patients have predominant proximal weakness, as in PM, with a muscle biopsy showing a few rimmed vacuoles. This presents a problem since no criterion for the number of rimmed vacuoles is available. Recently, Askanas and co-workers described strong positive muscle ®bre staining in biopsies from s-IBM patients using the monoclonal SMI-31 antibody directed against phosphorylated neuro®laments [8]. They advocated this procedure as a diagnostic method applicable in routine clinical practice, but its clinical performance has not been quanti®ed.

The ®rst aim of this study was to de®ne a threshold in the percentage of vacuolated ®bres measured in the routinely applied H&E staining that can help differentiating between s-IBM and PM. The second aim was to investigate the diagnostic gain of adding the relatively time and cost consuming SMI-31 staining to the H&E staining.

Patients and methods

Patient population

Pathology reports of all patients who underwent a muscle biopsy in our hospital between 1990 and 1998 were studied. Patients with endomysial lymphocytic in®ltrates in their biopsy and who ful®lled strict clinical and laboratory criteria for s-IBM (18 patients) or PM (17 patients) were selected. The criteria for `clinical s-IBM' were: age at onset over 30 years, insidious onset (years), typical IBM distribution of muscle weakness including either forearm ¯exor muscle weakness or disproportionate quadriceps muscle weakness, serum creatine kinase (CK) activity less than 12 times the upper limit of normal, and no response to adequately performed treatment with prednisone, if initiated [2,4]. Polymyositis was considered present if patients showed subacute onset (weeks to months), limb-girdle distribution of weakness, serum CK more than ten times the upper limit of normal, no dermatomyositis skin changes, and unequivocal response to prednisone therapy [1]. If necessary, patients were re-examined clinically to verify data on distribution of weakness and response to treatment. In one of these patients clinical re-examination was not possible because the patient had died and follow-up data were obtained from his rheumatologist and general practitioner.

Diagnostic tests

Muscle specimens from the 35 patients had been obtained previously by an open biopsy and had been frozen in a mixture of propane and propylene pre-chilled by liquid nitrogen and stored at 2708C until cryosectioned. Of each biopsy, two consecutive transverse cryostat sections of 6 and 12 mm, respectively, were prepared. The sections were picked up on gelatinized coverslips. The 6-mm sections were H&E-stained. The SMI-31 staining was performed as indicated by Askanas [8], with slight modi®cation: 12-mm sections were ®xed in acetone and then incubated with 1:2000-diluted SMI-31 antibody overnight. Biotinylated horse anti-mouse immunoglobulin was used as secondary reagent. Binding of biotinylated antibodies was detected following stepwise incubation with avidinbiotin-peroxidase complexes and a chromogenic substrate containing H 2 O 2 and diaminobenzidine. These sections were counterstained with haematoxylin. One of us with special expertise in examining muscle biopsies (J.E.H.) was blinded to the clinical diagnosis and examined all sections. However, identi®cation of the diagnosis by the presence of, for example, grouped ®bre atrophy in s-IBM biopsies probably could not always be avoided. In each patient, the H&E staining was read and scored ®rst (H&E test), directly followed by the SMI staining (SMI test). Thus while reading the SMI staining, the observer was aware of the H&E test results, mimicking a routine clinical setting. For the H&E staining we used the number of ®bres with rimmed vacuoles as a test result, and for the SMI staining the number of SMI-positive ®bres. These numbers were expressed as percentage of the total number of ®bres in each section. For both stainings the muscle biopsies of one patient with oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) and two patients with a glycogen storage disease served as positive and negative controls, respectively. Evident rimmed vacuoles and SMI-positivity were found in the patient with OPMD, and not in the patients with a glycogen storage disease. In each diagnosis group, nerve endings strongly stained with SMI-31.

Statistical analyses

Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were drawn for the two tests and the areas under the curves (ROC area) were calculated [9]. The ROC area is a suitable parameter to summarize the ability of the test to discriminate between patients with s-IBM and patients with PM. The ROC area can range from 0.5 (useless model, like a coin ¯ip) to 1.0 (perfect discrimination). A value over 0.7 can be interpreted as reasonably and over 0.8 as good [10]. For each test we subsequently searched for the optimal cut-off value in the range of test results. After this dichotomization, the test result that was indicative for the presence of s-IBM was regarded as the positive test result, the other as the negative. In our choice of cut-off value we allowed for a low as possible number of false-positive observations (i.e. false diagnoses of s-IBM), with an acceptable number of false-negative observations (i.e. false diagnoses of PM). This pre-requisite was based on the assumption that missing, and thus not treating a PM patient (in case of a test being false-positive for s-IBM) is more harmful then wrongfully treating a s-IBM patient (in case of a false-negative test). After the dichotomization two-by-two tables were constructed for the two tests and accompanying sensitivity, speci®city, positive predictive value and negative predictive value were calculated.

Additionally to the primary analysis, we evaluated in both disease groups separately whether the number of rimmed vacuoles was in¯uenced by certain patient characteristics, using univariable linear regression analysis. The factors analyzed were age, gender, disease duration at time of biopsy, prednisone taken at time of biopsy, degree of in¯ammation, atrophy, and necrosis. The degree of in¯ammation, atrophy and necrosis was semi-quanti®ed on a scale of 0±3 (0 no; 1 mild; 2 moderate; 3 severe).

Results

The `clinical s-IBM' group consisted of nine men and nine women aged 44±77 years (mean 62), with a disease duration at the time of biopsy of 8±192 months (mean 49). The `clinical PM' group consisted of seven men and 10 women aged 21±71 years (mean 43), with a disease duration of 1±144 months (mean 16). The mean serum CK at time of diagnosis was 525 units/l (standard deviation (SD) 423.2) in the s-IBM group and 3726 units/l (SD 3416) in the PM group. In the total patient group the mean number of ®bres examined in each section was 1589 (SD 864).

For the H&E-test the median percentage of vacuolated ®bres in the s-IBM group was 0.94% (25th and 75th percentile: 0.39 and 1.64%), and in the PM group 0% (25th and 75th percentile: 0 and 0.25%). The ROC-curve of the H&E test had a ROC-area of 0.87 (95% CI: 0.75±0.99) (Fig. 1). The optimal threshold was 0.3% ®bres with rimmed vacuoles yielding a sensitivity of 78%, a speci®city of 88%, a negative predictive value of 79% and positive predictive value of 87%. Higher thresholds yielded an almost similar speci®city, but with a relatively much lower sensitivity. At lower thresholds the speci®city decreased unacceptably more than the sensitivity increased (Table 1). Eight out of the 17 PM biopsies showed one or more ®bres with rimmed vacuoles (Fig. 2). EM had been performed previously in three of the PM patients with rimmed vacuoles and congo red staining in one other, all with normal results. In one s-IBM biopsy, there was a total lack of rimmed vacuoles.

Examples of SMI-31 positive ®bres and the distribution of SMI-positivity in relation to rimmed vacuoles are shown in Figs. 3 and 4. For the SMI-31 test the median percentage of positive ®bres in the s-IBM group was 0.69% (25th and 75th percentile: 0.18 and 1.64%), and in the PM group 0% (25th and 75th percentile: 0 and 0.08%). The ROC-curve of the SMI test (Fig. 1) had a ROC-area of 0.94 (95% CI: 0.86± 1.00). At a cut-off point of 0.18% SMI-positive ®bres the sensitivity was 83%, the speci®city 100%, the negative predictive value 85%, and the positive predictive value 100%. Other thresholds yielded less satisfying combinations of sensitivity, speci®city and predictive values (Table 1). In the biopsies of two out of the eight PM patients with rimmed vacuoles, one or two SMI-positive ®bres were found.   There was no association between the percentage of ®bres with rimmed vacuoles and any other of the variables investigated in the s-IBM group or in the PM group.

Discussion

The ®rst aim of the present study was to de®ne a quantitative criterion for differentiation between s-IBM and PM based on the detection of rimmed vacuoles in the H&E staining. We found an optimal cut-off point of three per 1000 ®bres yielding a sensitivity of 78%, a speci®city of 88%, a negative predictive value of 79% and positive predictive value of 87%. This means that of all patients with three or more per 1000 ®bres with rimmed vacuoles, on average 21% is wrongly diagnosed as PM, and of all patients with two or less vacuolated ®bres per 1000 ®bres, 13% is wrongly diagnosed as s-IBM. It should be noted that we allowed for a low as possible number of missed PM patients with an acceptable number of IBM patients wrongly diagnosed with PM. This is important since many clinicians do not treat s-IBM patients, because of the poor results and fear of side effects of immunosuppressive medication, especially in an elderly patient. Furthermore, we have shown that in s-IBM, ®bres containing rimmed vacuoles may be scarce (median was only 0.94%) and that the diagnosis can be easily missed if only several hundreds of ®bres can be examined as in the case of, for example, needle biopsies.

The second aim was to evaluate the additional diagnostic value of a new test applicable in routine clinical practice. Adding the SMI-31 reading brought the number of missed PM patients to zero. In other words: the SMI-31 staining (read with knowledge of the H&E staining result) will reduce the number of PM patients who are wrongfully not treated because they were falsely diagnosed as s-IBM patients. Therefore, the SMI-31 staining can be useful especially in patients with clinical features of PM, but with rimmed vacuoles in the H&E staining. It should be kept in mind, however, that the differentiation between PM and s-IBM Fig. 3. Two SMI-31-positive muscle ®bres in a biopsy taken from a 73year-old man with clinical and laboratory features of s-IBM. Immunoreactivity may be localized subsarcolemmal with a twisted or bundle-like appearance, or be visible as multi-focal dark dots dispersed through the cytoplasm. rests primarily on the combination of clinical, laboratory and histopathological abnormalities, and that a quantitative criterion such as the percentage of rimmed vacuoles or SMI positive ®bres must be used as an additional diagnostic tool.

Adding the SMI staining did not signi®cantly improve the number of correctly diagnosed s-IBM patients. Thus, the SMI-test does not diminish the need for a repeated biopsy in patients clinically suspected for s-IBM, but without rimmed vacuoles or other pathological signs of s-IBM.

In eight out of the 17 PM biopsies, one or more ®bres containing rimmed vacuoles were found. In the literature, only two PM patients with rimmed vacuoles have been described [11,12]. A small proportion of s-IBM patients tend to respond partially and temporarily to steroid, immunosuppressive or IVIg therapy, but unequivocal, lasting clinical improvement after immunosuppressive treatment has been reported in only a few patients [13,14]. Our ®ndings underline the need for a diagnostic test to help differentiating between patients who are likely to respond to treatment and patients who are not.

The evaluation of diagnostic tests should preferably be carried out among patients clinically suspected of having the disease at interest (here s-IBM), i.e. the disease which the test under evaluation (in our study the H&E staining and the SMI staining) is intended to rule in or out [10,15]. In the present example, such an `indicated population' would also include patients having diseases with similar clinical features as s-IBM such as motorneurone disease and distal myopathies. However, the diagnostic challenge investigated here is usually encountered in a phase of the diagnostic process in which the differential diagnoses already have been narrowed down to the in¯ammatory myopathies only. Another methodological issue worth noticing is that the tests' populations consisted of clinically distinct and unequivocal cases. Ideally, this study should be followed by an investigation in patients with various degrees of clinical suspicion, as well as evaluation of the tests' intra-and inter-observation variation.

We conclude that (1) rimmed vacuoles can be present in patients who are diagnosed with PM on clinical and laboratory grounds; (2) in our study population a threshold of three per 1000 vacuolated ®bres in the H&E staining allowed for a speci®city of 88% and a sensitivity of 78% for the diagnosis s-IBM; (3) adding the SMI staining can be helpful in differentiating patients who respond to treatment and patients who do not, especially in patients clinically suspected of PM, but with rimmed vacuoles in the H&E staining.

Acknowledgements

We thank Drs A.R. Wintzen, M.L.C. Maat-Schieman, G.H. Jansen, and J.G. van der Bom for valuable advice.

Fig. 1 .1Fig.1. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves for the two diagnostic tests (V, H&E test; K, SMI-31 test). A ROC curve is composed by the values for sensitivity (true-positive rate) and 1 2 speci®city (false-positive rate) calculated for a series of cut-offs. The diagonal line represents diagnosis by chance: here, at all possible cut-offs the true-positive rate is equal to the false-positive rate. The more a ROC curve approaches the left upper corner of the diagram, the more discriminative the test is.

Fig. 2 .2Fig.2. Rimmed vacuoles in a muscle ®bre in a biopsy taken from a 42-yearold woman with `clinical PM' (sub-acute onset, proximal, symmetrical weakness, a 40 £ elevated initial CK activity, and response to treatment with prednisone). H&E stain.

Fig. 4 .4Fig. 4. Muscle ®bre in biopsy taken from a 66-year-old man with `clinical s-IBM', showing the corresponding distribution of abnormalities in the H&E staining (A) and in the SMI-31 staining (B).

Table 11Test characteristics of the H&E staining and the SMI-31 staining for the diagnosis s-IBM, found with several thresholds in the range of the test results a Se, sensitivity; Sp, speci®city; PV 1 , positive predictive value; PV 2 , negative predictive value. Cut-off H&E test expressed as percentage of ®bres containing one or more rimmed vacuoles. Cut-off SMI-31 test expressed as percentage of ®bres staining positive.Cut-off (%)Se (%)Sp (%)PV 2 (%)PV 1 (%)H&E test0.15896585720.3788879880.561947092SMI-31 test0.05947192770.1883100851000.55610068100a

