Novel cytoplasmic immunolocalization of RNA polymerase II in inclusion-body myositis muscle

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (IBM) is a progressive degenerative muscle disease of older persons. Abnormalities of geneexpression and RNA metabolism have recently been proposed to contribute to the IBM pathogenic cascade. We now demonstrate, using well characterized, epitope-speci®c antibodies, that the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II is abnormally accumulated in the cytoplasm of IBM muscle ®bers, where it is co-localized with phosphorylated tau on IBM paired helical ®laments. Since RNA polymerase II is a crucial nuclear factor involved in both transcription and mRNA processing, our results support the hypothesis that abnormality of either or both of those processes might be caused, in part, by pathological traf®cking of RNA polymerase II, and that abnormal traf®cking might be an important factor in the IBM pathogenic cascade. NeuroReport 12:1809±1814 & 2001 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

INTRODUCTION

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (IBM) is the most common, progressive and debilitating muscle disease of older persons (recently reviewed in [1]). It is of unknown etiology and pathogenesis. Two major pathological features of the IBM muscle are speci®c vacuolar degeneration of muscle ®bers, characterized by intracellular accumulations of amyloid beta (Aâ) and 15±21 nm diameter paired helical ®laments (PHFs) containing phosphorylated tau, both of which are congophilic [1], and mononuclear-cell in¯ammation of various degrees [1]. An intriguing feature of the IBM molecular phenotype is its striking similarity to that of Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain. In addition to taucontaining PHFs and accumulations of Aâ, in IBM there is accumulation within muscle ®bers of two other epitopes of amyloid-â precursor protein (AâPP), presenilin-1, apolipoprotein E, and several other `Alzheimer characteristic' proteins [1]. Similarly to AD [2], aberrant intracellular signal-transduction cascades, possibly modulated by oxidative stress and aging, have been postulated to be important in the IBM pathogenesis [1]. Abnormalities in gene expression and RNA metabolism may also play a role in the IBM pathogenesis. IBM abnormal muscle ®bers express increased mRNAs, suggesting increased transcription of several genes, including AâPP-751, cellular prion protein, and enzymes involved in cellular defense against oxidative stress (e.g. glutathione peroxidase, catalase and SOD1) [1], and c-jun (Broccolini and Askanas, unpublished observation, 2000). They also show ectopic accumulation of tran-scription factors NFkB [3] and c-Jun [1], and of the transcription regulator redox factor 1 (Ref-1) [4], all of which associate with cytoplasmic PHFs [1,3,4] and also ectopic, PHF-associated, accumulation of RNA and survival motor neuron protein (SMN) [5]. SMN is an RNAbinding protein involved in gene transcription and in nuclear and cytoplasmic RNA processing ( [6] and references therein). Mutations of the SMN gene are responsible for autosomal recessive spinal muscular atrophy [7]. SMN can interact with RNA polymerase II through RNA helicase A, a newly recognized SMN complex-associated protein [6].

RNA polymerase II (RNA-pol-II) is a ubiquitously expressed multi-subunit nuclear enzyme that transcribes all protein-coding genes, and it is also involved in the early steps of mRNA processing (capping, polyadenylation and splicing) (reviewed in [8,9]). The largest subunit of RNA pol II binds both to DNA and, through its C-terminal domain (CTD), to various transcription and mRNA processing factors [8,9]. The functional association of those factors with the CTD is regulated by phosphorylation [9]. In mammals, the CTD is composed of 52 heptapeptide repeats, each containing three serine residues that can be phosphorylated by several kinases [9]. Both the pattern and the extent of CTD phosphorylation are in¯uenced by intracellular and extracellular signals [9]. For example, heat shock, oxidative stress, and viral infection increase CTD phosphorylation [9]. Abnormal function of RNA-pol-II has been implicated in multiple pathological processes, includ-ing viral infections, cancer and genetic diseases [8]. In AD pathogenesis, a role was suggested for `in®delity of transcription' [10], i.e. random transcription errors generated by aging related abnormal RNA-pol-II resulting in synthesis of abnormal mRNAs and proteins.

In our study, we asked whether abnormalities of the largest subunit of RNA-pol-II may participate in the IBM pathogenesis by studying its expression in IBM muscle.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Patients: Immunocytochemical studies were performed on sections of diagnostic muscle biopsies obtained from 19 patients with these diagnoses: IBM (6), dermatomyositis (3), polymyositis (2), morphologically non-speci®c myopathy (2), non-IBM vacuolar myopathy (1), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (3), normal muscle (2). Diagnoses were based on clinical and laboratory investigations, including our routine 18-reaction histochemistry of the muscle biopsy.

Light microscopic immunocytochemistry: Immunocytochemistry was performed on 10 ìm sections of fresh-frozen muscle biopsies. The sections were either un®xed or pre®xed with 2% paraformaldehyde. Peroxidase±antiperoxidase and immuno¯uorescence procedures were performed as described [3±5] using the following antibodies that recognize the largest RNA-pol-II subunit: (1) N20 (rabbit polyclonal), speci®cally recognizing the non-phosphorylated N-terminal epitope (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc. Santa Cruz, CA) diluted 1:20 to 1:50; (2) H5 [11] (mouse monoclonal, IgM; Berkeley Antibody Company, Berkeley, CA), speci®cally recognizing phosphorylated serine-2 of the CTD heptapeptide repeats [12], diluted 1:100;

(3) H14 [11] (mouse monoclonal, IgM; Berkeley Antibody Company, Berkeley, CA), speci®cally recognizing phosphorylated serine-5 of the CTD heptapeptide repeats [12], diluted 1:100; and (4) MPM-2 [13] (mouse monoclonal, IgG; Upstate Biotechnology, Beverly, MA), recognizing a yet-unde®ned phosphoepitope of the C-terminal domain (CTD) [14], diluted 1:200±1:1000. H5 and MPM-2 detect only hyper-phosphorylated RNA-pol-II molecules, while H14 detects both hyper-and intermediately phosphorylated RNA-pol-II molecules in cultured mammalian cells [11,14].

Double immuno¯uorescence utilized the above antibodies, combined with each other or with one of the following mouse monoclonal antibodies: (1) AT8 (IgG), recognizing phosphorylated (p) Ser202/Thr205 [15] epitope of tau protein (Innogenetics, Alharetta, GA), diluted 1:10;

(2) CP3 [16] (IgM), recognizing the p-Ser214 epitope of tau [16] (a gift from Dr Peter Davies, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, NY), diluted 1:10 (both AT8 and CP3 recognize AD and IBM PHFs [1,15±17]); or (3) anti-desmin (IgG) (Chemicon, Temecula, CA), which identi®es regenerating muscle ®bers, diluted 1:20, as described [3±5]. Hoechst 33342 (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR), a DNAbinding dye, was used to identify muscle nuclei. To identify neuromuscular junctions (NMJs), we utilized ábungarotoxin (á-BT) conjugated to the ¯uorescent marker Alexa 488 (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR), which binds to the postsynaptic nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, as described [3±5]. To block non-speci®c binding of antibody to Fc receptors, the sections were preincubated with normal goat or rabbit serum diluted 1:10. Omission of the primary antibody, or its replacement with non-immune serum or irrelevant antibodies, were used to control for speci®city, as described [3±5]. Dephosphorylation of sections with alkaline phosphatase (type VII-L, Sigma, Saint Louis, MO), 10 U/ml in 0.1 M Tris±HCl, pH 8.0, for 3 h at 378C, served as an additional control for phospho-speci®city of MPM-2 and H5 antibodies.

Immuno-electronmicroscopy: This was performed on 10 ìm un®xed frozen sections adhered to the bottom of 35 mm Petri dishes, as described [3±5]. MPM-2, N20, and H5 were immunolocalized with appropriate secondary antibodies conjugated either to horseradish peroxidase (HRP) or 10 nm gold particles. Double immuno-electronmicroscopy (immuno-EM) utilized N20 antibody combined with either MPM-2 or H5 antibodies, using appropriate (species-and isotype-speci®c) secondary antibodies conjugated to 10 or 5 nm gold particles.

RESULTS

Light-microscopic immunocytochemistry: Myonuclei in all biopsies, IBM and controls, were immunoreactive to various degrees with N20, MPM-2 and H5 antibodies, both in ®xed and un®xed sections. Fixation with paraformaldehyde considerably enhanced nuclear staining by MPM-2 and H5. With H14, all myonuclei were immunoreactive, but only after ®xation. There were no apparent differences in the intensity and the pattern of nuclear staining among different muscle biopsies, except for N20 in regenerating muscle ®bers.

With MPM-2 antibody, 80±90% of the vacuolated muscle ®bers and 10±15% of the non-vacuolated ®bers in IBM biopsies had numerous well de®ned, very prominent, squiggly, linear or dotty immunoreactive inclusions (Fig. 1a). H5 and N20 antibodies produced a similar pattern of immunoreactivity, but in only 50±60% of the abnormal muscle ®bers (Fig. 1b,c). With H14, there were small and weakly reactive inclusions in a minority of the abnormal ®bers (not shown). Dephosphorylation of the tissue sections greatly decreased or eliminated the immunostaining achieved with MPM-2 and H5, con®rming the phospho-speci®city of their reactions in IBM (Fig. 1d±g). Hoechst 33342 counterstaining revealed that in IBM ®bers the vast majority of the MPM-2-, H5-and N20-abnormal immunoreactivity was cytoplasmic, not associated with nuclei (Fig. 2a±c). In 70±80% of the abnormal muscle ®bers, MPM2, N20-and H5-immunoreactive inclusions co-localized with CP3-and AT8-immunoreactive inclusions, the latter two antibodies indicating phosphorylated tau of IBM-PHFs (Fig. 2d±i).

None of the control biopsies contained MPM-2-, N20-, H5-or H14-immunoreactive inclusions characteristic of the IBM abnormal muscle ®bers. Regenerating muscle ®bers in all myopathies had strongly increased nuclear and diffuse cytoplasmic immunoreactivity with N20 antibody, but no cytoplasmic reactivity with MPM-2, H5 or H14 (Fig. 3a±c).

The postsynaptic domain of neuromuscular junctions, in all control and IBM biopsies that contained them, was strongly immunoreactive with N20 antibody, but not with MPM-2, H5 and H14. Depending on the plane of section, the N20 immunopositivity either strictly co-localized with the bound á-BT or occupied a slightly larger territory (Fig. 3d,e).

Immuno-eletronmicroscopy: By both HRP-and golddetection methods, MPM-2, H5 and N20 immunopositivities were closely associated with PHFs, where they colocalized with each other (Fig. 4a±c). Because H14 immunoreacted only weakly by light±microscopy, immuno-electronmicroscopy was not performed with it.

DISCUSSION

We provide immunocytochemical evidence that the largest subunit of RNA-pol-II is abnormally accumulated in IBM muscle ®bers. Although the muscle ®ber RNA-pol-II in all non-IBM biopsies resided exclusively in the nuclei, in IBM ®bers the vast majority of the RNA-pol-II-immunoreactive inclusions were cytoplasmic. This is harmonious with our previous studies demonstrating abnormal cytoplasmic accumulation in IBM muscle ®bers of other normally nuclear proteins, for example NF-kB, c-Jun and Ref-1 [1,3,4]. It is possible that in IBM a general, yet unknown, pathological mechanism causes aberrant cytoplasmic accumulation of several factors that are normally involved in the nuclear functions of gene transcription and mRNA processing. Three possible explanations are that those cytoplasmically synthesized nuclear regulatory proteins are: 1) trapped in the cytoplasm due to binding to other proteins abnormally accumulated there; 2) affected by unde®ned impaired nuclear importation mechanisms; or 3) actively exported from the nuclei. More than one of these phenomena might be occuring in sporadic IBM.

In IBM-PHFs, the RNA-pol-II largest subunit might be bound to another PHF-associated protein, including the phosphorylated tau itself. The RNA-pol-II CTD is physiologically able to associate with various proteins [9], including SMN [6], which was previously shown to be associated with IBM-PHFs.

Cytoplasmic accumulation of RNA-pol-II could also occur due to impaired nuclear import. Oxidative stress, partially through activation of ERK, can inhibit nuclear import in cultured smooth muscle cells [18]. Since IBM muscle ®bers express both markers of oxidative stress and active ERK [1], possibly both might contribute to an impaired nuclear import.

The third possibility is harmonious with a proposed viral etiology of sporadic IBM [1]. Viruses are known to affect nucleo-cytoplasmic relationships [19]. Infection of several types of cultured cells (including L6 rat myoblasts) with vaccinia, a poxvirus, causes translocation of the largest subunit of cellular RNA-pol-II from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, where it is thought to have a role in viral replication [20]. IBM cytoplasmic PHFs contain RNA [5], which could be of viral type, and the association of HTLV-1 retroviral infection with IBM has been demonstrated in rare patients [1].

Immunocytochemical techniques used in our study do not permit interpretation of whether or not the abnormal cytoplasmic accumulation of RNA-pol-II causes a decrease of it in IBM muscle nuclei. If there would be a slight decrease of nuclear RNA-pol-II, that could cause downregulation of some speci®cally-sensitive genes, thereby contributing to the IBM pathogenesis. As yet there is no evidence of a generalized decrease of gene expression in   NEUROREPORT G. M. WILCZYNSKI, W. K. ENGEL AND V. ASKANAS IBM muscle, and several genes, such as AâPP and cellular prion, are over-expressed [1].

The major MPM-2-reactive epitope in non-mitotic cells is the phosphorylated CTD of RNA polymerase II [14]. We therefore postulate that in IBM muscle, CTD is a main MPM-2-detected phosphoepitope. Because MPM-2-immunoreactive ®bers were more numerous in IBM than ®bres with N20 and H5 immunoreactivity, it is possible that MPM-2 recognizes other immunoreactive phosphoproteins there, or that the strength and penetration of the MPM-2 antibody is superior to that of N20 and H5.

It is not currently known which residue(s) MPM-2 may bind to on the CTD heptapeptide repeats of RNA pol II, nor which kinase generates that phosphoepitope(s) [14]. It has been suggested that ERK generates an MPM-2-binding phosphoepitope on the CTD [14] because ERK phosphorylates CTD ef®ciently in vitro ( [21] and references therein), MPM-2 immunoreactivity with the CTD is strongly enhanced by heat shock that is known to activate ERK [14], and ERK generates MPM-2-reactive phosphoepitopes on other proteins ( [14] and references therein). Since ERK is prominently activated in IBM abnormal muscle ®bers [1], it is plausible to propose that ERK might generate MPM-2reactive phosphoepitopes there. On the other hand, antibody H5, which is prominently immunoreactive in IBM, recognizes serine-2 of CTD heptapeptide repeats [12], a residue that has been reported not to be phosphorylated by ERK in vitro [21]. It is certainly possible that in IBM abnormal muscle ®bers, other kinase(s), in addition to ERK, can phosphorylate the CTD. For example, DNAdependent protein kinase (DNA-PK), which is activated by oxidative DNA damage [22], phosphorylates serine-2 and 7, but not serine-5 of RNA pol II CTD heptapeptides in vitro [21]. It is not known whether DNA-PK is activated in IBM abnormal muscle ®bers.

In AD brain, MPM-2 antibody recognizes several phosphoproteins (mol. wt 50±300 kDa), which are either not expressed or expressed at very low levels in normal brain tissue [23]. MPM-2 labels AD neuro®brillary tangles, but does not recognize tau [23]. Abnormal expression of MPM-2-positive phosphoepitopes in AD brain has been proposed to result from aberrant activation of cell cycle-related mechanisms [23,24]. That proposal was supported by the fact that the cdk1±cyclin B complex (a major mitotic kinase), which can directly and indirectly generate multiple phosphoepitopes that bind MPM-2 antibody in mitotic cells ( [23] and references therein), is abnormally expressed and activated in AD brain [24]. However, in abnormal IBM muscle ®bers, despite pronounced MPM-2 immunoreactivity, there was no immunocytochemically identi®able expression of the cdk1±cyclin B complex (Wilczynski and Askanas, unpublished, 2000), even though the antibodies we used were the same as used in AD brain [24], and their sensitivity was con®rmed by positive immunostaining of normal human proliferating myoblasts (McFerrin, Wilczynski and Askanas, unpublished, 2000). Therefore, the MPM-2 phosphoepitope(s) we demonstrate in IBM are unlikely to be generated by that mitotic kinase. Possibly another cell cycle kinase plays a role in the IBM pathogenic cascade. While this manuscript was in preparation, an H5reactive epitope of RNA-pol-II CTD was reported to be associated with AD neuro®brillary tangles (which embody tau-containing PHFs) and it was postulated to result from aberrant activation of the cdk1±cyclin B complex [25].

Our present study underscores an additional remarkable similarity between the molecular phenotype of IBM muscle and AD brain, even if the accumulation of abnormal RNApol-II on the PHFs of IBM and AD might eventually be found to be governed by different direct mechanisms. The similarity suggests that demonstrated oxidative stress [1,2] Fig. 4. Immuno-electronmicroscopy in IBM vacuolated muscle ®bers. (a) Lower power electronmicrograph of peroxidase reaction demonstrates that the dark reaction-product (top) achieved with H5 antibody covers paired-helical ®laments (PHFs) exclusively and entirely, whereas the adjacent portion of the myo®ber (bottom) is not immunostained. (b,c), higher power single-and double-labeled gold immuno-electronmicroscopy illustrating that both N20 and MPM-2 antibodies label PHFs. N20 5 nm gold; MPM-2 10 nm gold. (a) 323 300; 374 000; (c) 358 500.

and proposed transcriptional in®delity [10] in the two types of aging postmitotic cells may lead to the abnormalities of RNA-pol-II and other transcription factors in both diseases.

In disease-control and normal muscle, increased expression of the RNA-pol-II largest subunit, respectively in regenerating muscle ®bers diffusely, and the postsynaptic domain of NMJs, was detectable only in the form of the non-phosphorylated N20-reactive N-terminal epitope. This may represent abundantly synthesized RNA-pol-II molecules related to the increased expression of genes at those sites. It also suggests that the aberrantly located epitopes detected in IBM-®ber cytoplasm might be hyper-phosphorylated, especially since H5 and MPM-2 antibodies detect RNA-pol-II that is hyper-phosphorylated [11,14]. Hypothetically, a pathological hyper-phosphorylation of RNA-pol-II (perhaps determined by oxidative stress, aging, or viral infection) might be the cause of its cytoplasmic accumulation, and thus could be an important mechanism in the IBM pathogenic cascade. Conceivably, more subtle pathologic hyper-phosphorylation of RNA-pol-II molecules that do manage to enter IBM nuclei (of inclusion-and noninclusion-containing muscle ®bers) could interfere with their important functions of transcription and RNA processing.

CONCLUSION

Our study demonstrates abnormal accumulation of the RNA-pol-II largest subunit within IBM muscle ®bers, which may be secondary to proposed causative mechanisms of IBM: cellular oxidative stress, aging, and viral infection. Our ®ndings in IBM are harmonious with, and provide a novel aspect of, the previously demonstrated abnormalities in the expression of several genes, including abnormal cytoplasmic accumulation of various nuclear factors and RNA. Our studies suggest that abnormalities of gene-expression in the aging cellular muscle ®ber milieu may play an important role in IBM pathogenesis.

Acknowledgements: Supported in parts by grants from the National Institutes of Health (AG16768), and the Muscular Dystrophy Association (both to V.A.). We are grateful to Dr P. Davies for his generous gift of CP3 antibody. G.M.W. is a postdoctoral fellow in Dr Askanas' laboratory. Maggie Baburyan provided excellent technical assistance in electronmicroscopy and photography.

Fig. 1 .1Fig. 1. Light-microscopy of peroxidase±antiperoxidase (PAP) reaction in inclusion body myositis (IBM) muscle. Strongly immunoreactive inclusions with MPM-2 (a), H5 (b) and N20 (c) antibodies are present in abnormal muscle ®bers. On two sets of serial sections, dephosphorylation of one section of each pair prevented immunoreactive inclusions achieved with MPM-2 (d,e) and H5 (f,g). All 3 1100.

Fig. 2 .2Fig. 2. Double-labeled ¯uorescence in IBM muscle. (a±c) Co-localization of MPM-2 (a), H5 (b) and N20 (c) with the Hoechst 33342 nuclear marker. Pink nuclei indicate double immunoreactivity. The vast majority of immunoreactive inclusions are not associated with nuclei. (d±i), MPM-2-and N20immunoreactive inclusions closely co-localize with CP3-and AT8-immunoreactive inclusions (d,e, and g,h; f and i double exposure). CP3 and AT8 indicate phosphorylated tau on IBM paired helical ®laments (PHFs). All 31100.

Fig. 3 .3Fig. 3. Double-labeled ¯uorescence in morphologically non-speci®c myopathy (a±c). A small regenerating muscle ®ber, identi®ed by strong cytoplasmic desmin immunoreactivity (b), has strong N20 immunoreactivity in both the cytoplasm and the nucleus (a). (c) Double exposure. (d,e), normal human neuromuscular junction, showing close co-localization of N20 immunoreactivity (d) with á-bungarotoxin (á-BT) bound to the postsynaptic acetylcholine receptors (e). All 31100.

