Inclusion Body Myositis in Connecticut Observations in 35 Patients During an 8-Year Period

Introduction

Sporadic inclusion body myositis (IBM) is the most common acquired myopathy in patients older than 50 years (24,30). Since the earliest pathologic descriptions, much has been learned about the clinical and etiopathologic features of this disorder (2,9). Clinically, most patients present to their physicians following a period of slowly progressive limb weakness. The predominant sites of weakness and atrophy at onset include the quadriceps, long finger flexors, and ankle extensors (23,24). The diagnosis of IBM is established histologically by the findings of an inflammatory myopathy associated with rimmed vacuoles and tubulofilamentous inclusions (15). Other pathologic features include abnormal accumulations of ␤-amyloid and its precursor proteins, hyperphosphorylated tau, ␣1-antichymotrypsin, apolipoprotein E, ubiquitin, and prion protein (2,29). Initially, IBM was characterized and treated as a primary inflammatory myopathy; however, the accumulation of abnormal cellular proteins and the refractoriness of the disease symptoms to the various immunotherapies have raised the possibility that IBM is a degenerative disease of muscle (29).

Since the first clinicopathologic description of IBM in 1967 (9), several series describing the clinical and pathologic features of IBM have been reported (1,5,7,8,11,12,14,18,20,21,26). However, large regional studies reporting the prevalence rate, referral patterns, specific distribution of muscle weakness at presentation, and rate of disease progression have generally been lacking. In the present study we examine these features retrospectively in a series of patients with IBM seen in a regional referral center in Connecticut over 8 years.

Patients and Methods

We reviewed the medical records, electromyography (EMG) reports, and muscle histopathology on all patients with IBM evaluated in the Muscular Dystrophy Association Clinic at the University of Connecticut Health Center (UCHC) by 2 neuromuscular physicians (both authors) over an 8-year period (1992)(1993)(1994)(1995)(1996)(1997)(1998)(1999)(2000). UCHC is centrally located in the state and serves as a neuromuscular referral center for a state population base of 3.2 million people. Demographic, clinical, and EMG data were recorded on all patients who met the following criteria: 1) Connecticut state resident, 2) nonfamilial late-onset myopathy, 3) clinical and muscle biopsy features consistent with the criteria of definite or possible IBM as proposed by Griggs et al (15), and 4) no other concurrent medical or neurologic disorders known to cause weakness. All muscle histochemistry slides and electron microscopy findings were reviewed by a neuropathologist. The prevalence rate was calculated based on population statistics for the state of Connecticut in June 1998.

With regard to disease progression, we recorded and compared longitudinal strength-testing data on a subset of patients with IBM who were followed at our center. Results of manual muscle testing and hand-grip dynamometry were recorded on IBM patients who met the following criteria: 1) followed at least annually for 4 successive years (annual visits from 10 to 14 months apart), 2) manual muscle testing scores and hand-grip force values recorded during each visit by the same examiner (KJF), 3) no treatment with immunotherapy during the evaluation period, and 4) no other concurrent medical or neurologic disorder known to cause weakness during the evaluation period. Muscle strength was determined by manual muscle testing using the Medical Research Council (MRC) grading system of 0-5 on 14 muscle groups on both sides: arm abductors, flexors, and extensors; wrist flexors and extensors; finger flexors and extensors; hip flexors; knee flexors and extensors; ankle flexors and extensors; and toe flexors and extensors. The finger flexor score was calculated by determining the mean value of 4 muscle groups including the flexor digitorum superficialis, flexor pollicis longus, and flexor digitorum profundus of digits 2 and 5. The MRC score would be 70 in each of the upper and lower extremities in a subject with normal strength. We measured handgrip force using the Jamar hand-grip dynamometer (JA Preston Corp., Jackson, MI); force measurements were recorded in newtons (N) with the patient seated. The best of 3 trials per hand was recorded, and the right and left grip forces were summated for a combined force score. Patient grip force values were compared to those previously recorded in healthy age-matched controls (14).

Results

Thirty-five patients with IBM met the inclusion criteria for this review (Table 1). There were 23 men and 12 women (ratio, 1.9:1). The prevalence rate of IBM was calculated to be 10.7 ϫ 10 Ϫ6 for all patients, 14.5 ϫ 10 Ϫ6 for men, and 7.1 ϫ 10 Ϫ6 for women. The ageadjusted prevalence rate for age 45 years and older was calculated to be 28.9 ϫ 10 Ϫ6 for all patients, 42.1 ϫ 10 Ϫ6 for men, and 18.0 ϫ 10 Ϫ6 for women. The mean age at examination was 70.0 years and at symptom onset, 64.3 years. The mean latency between symptom onset and IBM diagnosis was 5.7 years (median, 5.0 yr; range, 1-25 yr). Only 2 patients developed symptoms of weakness before the age of 50 years; the youngest age of onset was 41 years.

Most patients (74%) were referred by neurologists; other referring physicians included rheumatologists, general internists, and orthopedic surgeons. The major referring diagnoses included motor neuron disease, polymyositis, and unspecified myopathy; only 5 patients were referred with suspected IBM (Table 2). Three patients with facial weakness were referred with probable facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy while 1 patient with moderate dysphagia was initially believed to have oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy. None of the patients had sensory symptoms; however, peripheral nerve or root disease was suspected in 3 patients presenting with prominent distal limb weakness. The major symptom at onset was leg weakness in 71% of patients. In most, the weakness was referable to the quadriceps muscles. These patients usually noted initial difficulty rising from a chair, or ascending or descending stairs. In 2 patients, anterior foreleg weakness or foot drop was the predominant symptom at onset.

Five patients presented with hand-grip weakness. In 1 patient, the presenting symptom of severe left forearm flexor weakness was initially attributed to a proximal median mononeuropathy. Four patients presented with swallowing difficulties and 1 with scapular winging. More than half the patients complained of swallowing difficulties at presentation. In most, the major complaint was a feeling that the bolus would "get stuck" or "would not pass" the upper esophagus following a swallow. Many patients described the need for modifications including smaller bites, prolonged chewing, and more frequent sips of liquid when swallowing coarse foods. Two patients with severe dysphagia described the need to regurgitate the swallowed bolus frequently because of poor passage. Symptoms of coughing and choking were infrequent, and none complained of nasal regurgitation. Mild facial weakness was present in 43% of patients and neck flexor weakness in 29%. Two patients were nonambulatory at the time of presentation. Asymmetry was noted in several muscle groups, especially the wrist and finger flexors (Figure 1A). All patients had quadriceps muscle atrophy (Figure 1B), most had forearm flexor atrophy, and more than half had atrophy of anterior foreleg muscles. The weakest muscle groups included the knee extensors, finger flexors, and ankle extensors (Figure 2). Grip strength was Except for 1 patient with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, none of the patients complained of dyspnea at rest, increasing exertional dyspnea, or orthopnea. The mean lung vital capacity in 16 patients was 73.3% of predicted (range, 45%-100%). The mean creatine kinase value was 444 U/L; 6 patients had normal creatine kinase values and 3 had values greater than 1,000 U/L. EMG studies were performed on all patients. Eight (23%) patients had evidence of a mild, subclinical, distally predominant, sensorimotor axonal polyneuropathy. Of these, 2 had probable diabetic polyneuropathy, 1 had a prior episode of acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy, and the remaining 5 patients had mild idiopathic polyneuropathy. Six patients, all older than 60 years, had absent lower extremity sural responses as the only abnormal nerve conduction study finding. The remainder (57%) had normal nerve conduction studies. Most patients had fibrillations and positive waves on needle EMG. Recruitment of motor units was myopathic only in 51%, mixed in 43%, and neuropathic only in 2 patients. All patients had light microscopic muscle biopsy features consistent with IBM including muscle fiber necrosis and regeneration, invasion of non-necrotic muscle fibers by inflammatory cells, and rimmed vacuoles (Figure 3). Of these, 77% had the characteristic electron microscopy features including myelin debris, vacuoles, and tubulofilamentous inclusions (definite IBM). In the remaining 23% of muscle biopsies, the inclusions were not visualized on electron microscopy. However, these patients all had the typical clinical features of IBM (possible IBM). Modified barium swallow studies were performed on 9 patients with IBM at or soon after the initial evaluation (Table 3). All had evidence of cricopharyngeus dysfunction, prominence, or spasm. Global weakness of deglutition was noted in less than half of these patients. Two patients with aspiration of barium were later referred for percutaneous esophagogastrostomy tubes. Concurrent medical problems in this series are shown in Table 4.

Twenty-nine patients (85%) with IBM were followed in our clinic for 1-8 years (mean, 4.1 yr). All complained of progressive weakness, especially referable to hand-grip and proximal lower extremity function. In addition to the 2 patients who were nonambulatory at presentation, 3 patients became nonambulatory during follow-up. The mean latency from symptom onset to nonambulatory status in the 5 patients was 8.9 years (range, 6.2-13.5 yr); all had knee extensor MRC scores of 2 or less at the time of transition from ambulatory status to wheelchair dependency. One patient died at age 81 years following a 30-year history of progressive weakness. Seventeen patients (49%) were treated with various medication therapies for short periods of time (2-3 months) during the course of their illness. These therapies included intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) in 10, prednisone combined with IVIG in 3, prednisone alone in 3, and oxandrolone in 2. In none of these short treatment trials did we or the patients note any improvement in strength or functional abilities. One patient treated with prednisone reported worsening of his leg weakness following a 3-month trial of 60 mg per day. Eight patients fulfilled criteria for longitudinal analyses. During the 4-year follow-up, the decline in the mean upper extremity MRC score was 3.5% per year (0.3% per month); mean lower extremity MRC score, 3.6% per year (0.3% per month); and mean grip strength, 10.7% per year (0.9% per month) (Figure 4).

Discussion

There have been few population prevalence studies of IBM. A prevalence rate of 4.3 ϫ 10 Ϫ6 was reported in the Netherlands (4); however, the authors considered this an underestimate due to incomplete ascertainment in some areas. The calculated prevalence rate of IBM in Connecticut is in accord with a recent study (26) from Western Australia in which  for patients over the age of 50 years. Our age-adjusted calculation for older patients (28.9 ϫ 10 Ϫ6 ) was slightly lower than that for Western Australia; however, our rates are probably an underestimate. Factors that may have lowered the calculated prevalence rates include incomplete ascertainment in the southwestern part of the state where neuromuscular patients may be referred to other centers, and underreporting due to misdiagnosis. The latter factor is especially worth mentioning as 86% of the IBM patients in this series, most referred by neurologists, were given other diagnoses before our evaluation. Symptom onset before age 50 years is uncommon in IBM. Descriptions of patients with disease onset as early as the second decade are found in several earlier studies (18). In a series of 40 patients (21), symptom onset before age 50 years was noted in only 7 patients (17%); the youngest was 28 years old. In the present series, only 2 patients were less than age 50 years at the onset of symptoms; the youngest was 41 years. The mean latency between the disease onset and the establishment of the diagnosis was 5.7 years; this value compares favorably with estimates from other large series (1,20,21). All patients in this series had evidence of quadriceps weakness and atrophy upon presentation, and 71% complained of leg weak-ness as the presenting symptom. The findings of weakness and atrophy of quadriceps, long finger flexors, and ankle extensor muscles were characteristic features seen in most patients at the time of diagnosis. Mild asymmetric weakness was found in most patients in this series. Asymmetry was most impressive in the long finger flexors with the finding of more prominent involvement on the nondominant side. This reaffirms our previous observation and suggests a slower rate of weakness progression in the dominant hand, possibly due to the effects of increased use and exercise (14). Descriptions of both distal and proximal weakness are found in the earliest clinical reports of IBM (8). However, it was a small series in 1986 (19) that first called to attention the prominent quadriceps and long finger flexor involvement in patients with IBM. In a series of 40 patients (21), distal weakness was found in 50% of patients and, in 35%, the distal weakness was equal to or greater than the proximal weakness. The most severely affected limb muscles were the biceps, triceps, iliopsoas, quadriceps, and tibialis anterior. Less severely involved muscles included the deltoid, pectoralis major, forearm, and intrinsic hand muscles. In a more recent series of 18 patients (20), the most severely affected limb muscles included the long finger flexors, knee extensors, and ankle extensors. Another noteworthy observation in IBM, found in this and other series, is the disparity of involvement between the hip flexors, which may be preserved until later in the course of the disease, and the knee extensors, which are usually involved early (1). Mild weakness of eye and mouth closure was present in 43% of patients in this series and up to one-third of patients in other reports (23). Mild neck flexor weakness was an inconsistent finding; and weakness of ocular, masticatory, soft palatal, and tongue muscles was not observed. Symptoms of dysphagia occurred in 54% of patients and were the major presenting problem in 11%. Problems with deglutition have been documented in 40%-84% of patients in other series (16,20,21). None of our patients presented solely with dysphagia as reported in another series (27). As in other studies, the symptoms and results of modified barium swallow studies implicated cricopharyngeus dysfunction as the primary problem.

Ancillary tests were generally supportive of a myopathic process. Fibrillations, positive waves, and myopathic-like recruitment patterns were documented in most patients during EMG testing. However, mixed or neuropathic recruitment patterns were observed in nearly one-half of patients. Despite the findings of a mild sensorimotor axonal polyneuropathy in 23% of patients, none complained of sensory symptoms. These findings compare favorably with prior neurophysiologic studies in IBM, whereas mixed or neuropathic-like recruitment patterns and nerve conduction studies abnormalities were reported (3,12,17,20,21). Although 2 macro-EMG studies (6,22) did not disclose neurogenic changes, the studies were restricted to 2 muscles, the biceps brachii and tibialis anterior, and the findings in 1 study contrasted with the concentric needle examination results in which both short-and long-duration complex motor unit action potentials were observed in both proximal and distal muscles.

The reasons for misdiagnosis of IBM by referring physicians are unclear. Based on our experience with this series of patients, we offer the following speculative explanations. First, several clinical and laboratory features of IBM resemble the findings in the progressive muscular atrophy variant of motor neuron disease. The clinical features that mimic motor neuron disease include the insidiously progressive and painless weakness and atrophy of both distal and proximal muscles. In addition, the mild to moderate elevation of serum creatine kinase is a finding observed in nearly one-half of patients with motor neuron disease (13).

Second, the characteristic finger flexor involvement is usually not recognized by referring physicians. The reasons for this may be that finger flexor weakness is not a prominent finding during the earliest evaluations or that examination of the flexor digitorum profundus and flexor pollicis longus muscles is not part of the routine neurologic assessment for generalized weakness.

Third, less common presentations including dysphagia and scapular winging may initially mimic other disorders including oculopharyngeal and facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophies (10,28).

Fourth, initial EMG findings in IBM are often interpreted as consistent with motor neuron disease. We understand how this may happen to the physician performing the EMG who begins with the clinical impression that the patient under study will probably have motor neuron disease. Still, even with the prominence of long-duration and rapidly firing motor unit action potentials in the muscles of many IBM patients, our experience is that the predominant type and pattern of recruitment is myopathic in most cases. Finally, when muscle biopsies are referred to the neuropathologist without a clinical history or mention of IBM as a possible diagnosis, the search for the characteristic neuropathologic features (including the performance of electron microscopy) may not be as vigilant as necessary. In some of these cases, the muscle histopathology may be interpreted as inflammatory myopathy, suggesting the diagnosis of polymyositis to the referring physician.

Inclusion body myositis is known to be a slowly progressive disorder yet there have been few reports on the rate of disease progression (7). In a study of 10 patients examined at least 3 times over a period of 6-58 months, quantitative motor testing using a handheld myometer found a mean decrease in muscle strength per month for all muscles (shoulder abduction, elbow flexion and extension, wrist extension, hip flexion, knee flexion and extension, and foot extension) of 1.4% per month (range, 0.5%-2.8% per mo) (20). In a recent study (25), a modified MRC score was obtained on 6 IBM patients during 2 clinic visits, each separated by a range of 12-52 months (mean, 24.5 mo). The mean MRC score between the 2 visits declined by 17% or 0.7% per month. In the present study, the mean rate of decline in the upper and lower extremity MRC scores for 8 patients over 4 years was 0.3% per month; and the decline in handgrip strength using a dynamometer was 0.9% per month. The reasons for the lower rate of progression in the present study as compared with the prior studies are not known. Small sample sizes and differences in retrospective analyses, methods of strength testing, and inter-and intra-rater reliability may account for the differences between series. Also, the rate of progression and disability is probably underestimated when changes are measured using a wholelimb rating scale (for example, upper or lower extremity MRC score) rather than a quantitative measure of strength in a specific muscle group (such as, finger flexors, knee extensors) that is more severely affected in patients with IBM.

Summary

Sporadic inclusion body myositis (IBM) is the most common acquired myopathy in patients older than 50 years. In order to provide information on the prevalence rate, presenting signs and symptoms, and disease progression of IBM in Connecticut, we reviewed the medical records, electromyography reports, and muscle histopathology of 35 patients with the diagnosis of definite or possible IBM evaluated at our neuromuscular referral center during an 8-year period (1992)(1993)(1994)(1995)(1996)(1997)(1998)(1999)(2000). There were 23 men and 12 women; the mean age at examination was 70.0 years (range, 50-85 yr) and at onset, 64.3 years (range, 41-80 yr). The mean latency between symptom onset and IBM diagnosis was 5.7 years (range, 1-25 yr). The prevalence rate of IBM was 10.7 ϫ 10 Ϫ6 for all patients, 14.5 ϫ 10 Ϫ6 for men, and 7.1 ϫ 10 Ϫ6 for women. The ageadjusted prevalence rate for age 45 years and older was 28.9 ϫ 10 Ϫ6 . Eighty-six percent of patients were referred with other diagnoses; the most common misdiagnosis was motor neuron disease. At presentation, the greatest weakness was observed in the knee extensors, finger flexors, and ankle extensors. Symptoms of dysphagia were noted in 54%. For 8 patients followed during 4 years, the decline in the mean upper extremity strength was 3.5% per year (0.3% per month), in mean lower extremity strength, 3.6% per year (0.3% per month), and in mean grip strength, 10.7% per year (0.9% per month).

FIG. 1 .FIG. 2 .12FIG. 1. Example of A. asymmetric finger flexor weakness and B. quadriceps atrophy in 2 patients with inclusion body myositis.

FIG. 3 .3FIG. 3. Muscle histopathology in patients with inclusion body myositis demonstrating A. endomysial inflammatory cells and myofiber necrosis (hematoxylin & eosin, original magnification ϫ 200); B. rimmed vacuoles (arrow) and eosinophilic inclusions (arrow head) (hematoxylin & eosin, original magnification ϫ 400); C. darkly stained angulated atrophic myofiber (arrow) (NADH-TR, original magnification ϫ 400); and D. tubulofilamentous inclusions (arrows) adjacent to myonucleus (electron microscopy, original magnification ϫ 14,000).

FIG. 4 .4FIG. 4. Longitudinal analyses for 8 patients with inclusion body myositis over 4 years: A. mean upper extremity Medical Research Council (MRC) scores; B. mean lower extremity MRC scores; C. mean grip strength; and D. mean cumulative percentage change in strength (UE MRC ϭ upper extremity MRC score; LE MRC ϭ lower extremity MRC score.)

TABLE 1 . Presenting clinical and laboratory features in 35 patients with IBM1Mean age (yr)70.0 (range, 50-85)Mean age at onset (yr)64.3 (range, 41-80)Mean latency between symptom onset5.7 (range, 1-25)and diagnosis (yr)Male23 (66%)Right handedness89%Major symptomLeg weakness71%Hand weakness14%Swallowing difficulties11%Scapular winging1 patientSwallowing difficultiesNone46%Mild40%Moderate9%Severe2 patientsFacial weakness43%Nonambulatory2 patientsMuscle atrophyAnterior thigh100%Forearm flexors91%Anterior foreleg57%Grip strength in 22 patients (N)*Dominant162.6 (range, 0-358)Nondominant105.3 (range, 0-296)Lung vital capacity in 16 patients73.3 (range, 45-100)(% of predicted)Mean creatine kinase value444 (range, 38-1,730)(normal, Ͻ269 U/L)(CK Ͼ 1,000, 3 patients)Nerve conduction studiesNormal57%Sensorimotor axonal polyneuropathy23%Absent lower extremity SNAPs20%Needle electromyographyFibrillations and positive waves89%Myopathic recruitment only51%Mixed recruitment43%Neurophatic recruitment only2 patientsMuscle biopsy (see text)Definite IBM77%Possible IBM23%*Healthy controls: dominant, 422.1 N; nondominant, 409.4 N.

TABLE 2 . Referring diagnoses in 35 patients with IBM2DiagnosisNo. of Patients (%)Motor neuron disease9 (26)Polymyositis7 (20)Unspecified myopathy7 (20)Inclusion body myositis suspect5 (14)Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy3 (9)Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy1 (3)Polyradiculopathy1 (3)Polyneuropathy1 (3)Median mononeuropathy1 (3)

TABLE 3 . Modified barium swallow study results in 9 patients with IBM3ResultNo. of Patients (%)Prominent cricopharyngeus9 (100)Reduced pharyngeal movements3 (33)Pooling in pyriform sinus4 (44)Upper esophageal achalasia2 (22)Aspiration2 (22)the prevalence was 9.3 ϫ 10 Ϫ6 for all patients, 10.9 ϫ 10 Ϫ6 for men, 7.7 ϫ 10 Ϫ6 for women, and 35.3 ϫ 10 Ϫ6

TABLE 4 . Concurrent medical problems in 35 patients with IBM4DisorderNo. of Patients (%)Hypertension13 (37)wCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 03/09/2023Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/md-journal by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCyDegenerative arthritis Cataracts Coronary artery disease Prostatic hypertrophy Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease Asthma Diabetes mellitus Hypothyroidism Gout Peptic ulcer disease Peripheral vascular disease Rheumatoid arthritis Ischemic stroke Subdural hematoma Acoustic neuroma Meningioma Acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy Prostate cancer Nephrolithiasis Membranous nephropathy Parkinson disease Atrial fibrillation Mitral valve prolapse Monoclonal gammopathy of unclear significance (IgG kappa)6 (17) 5 (14) 4 (11) 3 (9) 2 (6) 2 (6) 2 (6) 2 (6) 2 (6) 2 (6) 2 (6) 1 (3) 1 (3) 1 (3) 1 (3) 1 (3) 1 (3) 1 (3) 1 (3) 1 (3) 1 (3) 1 (3) 1 (3) 1 (3)

