Inflammatory muscle diseases

Dermatomyositis and polymyositis are treatable disorders of skeletal muscle. Despite their clinical similarities, they appear to have fundamentally different autoimmune origins. Inclusion body myositis, from its origins 30 years ago, has emerged as the commonest acquired myopathy of the elderly. Despite inflammatory changes, it is unclear whether it should be considered a primary inflammatory myopathy, and it generally responds poorly to the same treatments that are effective in other inflammatory myopathies. Curr Opin Neurol 14:591±596. # 2001

Introduction

The in¯ammatory myopathies (Table 1) are characterized by the presence of in¯ammatory in®ltrates within skeletal muscle. Despite some pathological similarities, the clinical features of these conditions vary enormously. This review is concerned with the idiopathic in¯ammatory myopathies. This group consists of dermatomyositis, polymyositis, and inclusion body myositis (IBM). There is considerable debate as to whether IBM should be included in the same group as dermatomyositis and polymyositis. Although it shares some clinical and pathological features with these two conditions, particularly polymyositis, there are suf®cient differences, particularly with respect to therapeutic response, to suggest that it should be considered separately. This review will consider ®rst dermatomyositis and polymyositis, and then IBM, looking at recent observations concerning selected clinical aspects, pathogenesis, and therapy. Throughout, a recurring theme will be the absence of good trials to answer many important unanswered questions about prognosis and treatment.

Dermatomyositis and polymyositis

Accurate ®gures for the incidence and prevalence of dermatomyositis and polymyositis are not available, and nor is there adequate data on their natural history. There is a dearth of randomized controlled trials of therapy. This is a re¯ection of the facts that they are relatively uncommon conditions, present to several different medical disciplines, and in many cases there is diagnostic imprecision in distinguishing between dermatomyositis and polymyositis. The ®eld desperately needs wellorganized multicentre studies looking at both their natural history and treatment. Dermatomyositis is commoner than polymyositis, and taken together their annual incidence is probably in the region of 10 per million population.

Clinical aspects

For many years, these two conditions were considered to have been essentially the same, distinguished only by the presence or absence of skin involvement. The `modern era' of polymyositis and dermatomyositis was heralded by the seminal papers of Bohan and Peter in 1975 [1,2]. It is noteworthy that IBM barely entered their discussions of classi®cation and pathological features.

Both are characterized by proximal weakness, which does not show the highly selective involvement of certain muscles, so characteristic of the muscular dystrophies. In dermatomyositis the onset may be acute (rarely presenting with rhabdomyolysis and myoglobinuria) and the rate of progression is rapid, over days or weeks, whereas in polymyositis it is often a much more chronic condition, evolving over months or years. Despite the suf®x `-itis', pain is uncommon. In dermatomyositis, patients may complain of exerciseinduced pain, but in chronic polymyositis pain is not usually a feature. Dysphagia and respiratory muscle involvement are more likely to be seen in acute cases, and thus in dermatomyositis.

Skin involvement is seen in the majority of cases of dermatomyositis, but not all. Dermatomyositis can be diagnosed in the absence of rash on the basis of pathological and other clinical criteria. Similarly, the classic skin changes may be seen in the absence of myositis ± dermatomyositis sine myositis. The commonest appearance is of a photosensitive erythematosus rash over the face, upper chest and hands. The photosensitivity has clinical implications [3]. Cutaneous calcinosis is seen much more frequently in childhood dermatomyositis, and may prove highly resistant to treatment. A recent report of a successful response to diltiazem is therefore encouraging, but requires con®rmation [4 . ]. Raynaud's phenomenon is seen in dermatomyositis, and may predate the onset of myopathic symptoms by many years. Dermatomyositis may also show features of scleroderma, and the existence of what is sometimes called an `overlap' syndrome (myositis plus other features of connective tissue disease) is perhaps indicative of our remaining uncertainties concerning pathogenesis.

Bohan and Peter [1] noted the possibility of a link between dermatomyositis and cancer. That relationship has been explored further, but unanswered questions remain. Many hundreds of individual case reports have appeared describing polymyositis or dermatomyositis in association with malignancy, but there have been only a few attempts at properly conducted case-controlled trials. A view expressed by many clinicians in the ®eld is that there is a strong link with dermatomyositis, but only a weak or absent link with polymyositis. Recent papers have tended to support that view. An early population-based study [5] showed that the relative risk of cancer was increased in both groups, but more so in dermatomyositis. However, it is likely that some patients with dermatomyositis, but without rash, may have been included in the polymyositis group, indicating that the relative risk was even greater in dermatomyositis than polymyositis [6]. Even the more recent studies may have had a similar problem. A further Scandinavian study [7 . ] again showed that there is a much stronger link with dermatomyositis than polymyositis. Unlike many other paraneoplastic syndromes, in which there is a link with a particular cancer (e.g. Lambert±Eaton syndrome with small-cell lung cancer), that and other studies, as well as numerous case reports, found many different cancers in patients with myositis. The commonest cancers in each group in the study by Hill et al. [7 . ] were ovarian for dermatomyositis and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma for polymyositis. There is some evidence that the country of abode and the age at onset of the myositis may be relevant with respect to the type of associated malignancy. A study in Taiwan [8 . ] thus also found an association between malignancy and dermatomyositis, with the commonest cancer being nasopharyngeal carcinoma. In the elderly, the risk appears to be higher, and in one study the commonest malignancy was rectal adenocarcinoma [9 . ]. Although malignancy may be evident at presentation, it may not surface for a year or more. In practice, all patients presenting with dermatomyositis should be thoroughly assessed for occult malignancy, paying attention to age (e.g. thinking of the prostate in older men) and risk factors for particular malignancy (e.g. chest scanning in a smoker with a normal chest X-ray). Vigilance should be maintained for several years after the diagnosis of the malignancy.

Interstitial lung disease (ILD) is seen in both dermatomyositis and polymyositis and is often, but not always, associated with the anti-Jo1 antibody (see below). Overall, approximately 80% of patients with ILD have anti-Jo1 antibodies, and the presence of such antibodies strongly predicts the development of ILD. The prevalence of ILD depends upon how it is de®ned. Only a small proportion of patients have frank symptomatic involvement. High de®nition computed tomography scanning and pulmonary function tests may reveal evidence of ILD in as many as 50%. It has been considered a poor prognostic factor by some [10], but not by others [11]. Like natural history data, information about prognosis is lacking and awaits long-term multicentre studies. The most recent data in adults comes from France [12]. The authors noted that different factors in¯uenced mortality in dermatomyositis and polymyositis. Immunosuppressant drugs showed no signi®cant effect on survival, and there was substantial morbidity and mortality relating to such drug therapy; yet more evidence of the need for proper multicentre studies. Childhood dermatomyositis shows a number of signi®cant differences to adult-onset disease and calcinosis is a particular problem. The disease in childhood may follow a monophasic or chronic course. There remain many unanswered questions concerning optimum immunosuppressant therapy regimes [13 . ,14].

Pathology and pathogenesis

Despite their clinical similarities, a great deal of evidence has accumulated to suggest that dermatomyositis and polymyositis have different immunopathological mechanisms. The seminal studies of Arahata and colleagues [15±19] marked the beginning of a new understanding. The fundamental tenets, which have been reviewed previously [20], are as follows.

It is believed that dermatomyositis is the result of a humorally mediated immune process, in which complement is activated and there is deposition of membrane attack complex within capillaries. Destruction of capillaries leads to ischaemia, which in turn leads to the characteristic myopathological ®ndings of muscle ®bre necrosis, microinfarcts and perifascicular atrophy. It is thus not a muscle-speci®c process, and the association with skin involvement and the involvement of other organs, including the lungs, heart and gastrointestinal tract, is perhaps not surprising. The in¯ammatory in®ltrates within muscle tend to be perivascular and there is an excess of B lymphocytes over T lymphocytes (which are more likely to be helper cells than cytotoxic).

Conversely, the evidence indicates that polymyositis is the result of cell-mediated immune processes, in which there is antigen-directed and MHC-I-restricted cytotoxicity mediated by CD8 T cells. The in¯ammatory in®ltrates tend to be within muscle fascicles, and T lymphocytes (with a predominance of T8 over T4) predominate over B lymphocytes. A characteristic ®nding, also seen in IBM, is the presence of `partial invasion'. CD8 T cells traverse the basal lamina and appear to be compressing a non-necrotic muscle ®bre. They release necrosis-inducing substances, including perforin, TNF-a and granzyme.

Despite the evidence supporting the above, there remain many unanswered questions. The initial antigenic stimulus for either is unknown. In dermatomyo-sitis, it is presumed that the antigen is a component of the vascular endothelium, whereas in polymyositis it is presumed that the antigen is on the surface of the muscle ®bre and is presented to the CD8 T cells by MHC-I. A greater understanding of the initial trigger may prove to be helpful in designing more speci®c immunotherapies. Cellular immune mechanisms have been reviewed [21].

Despite the proposed different pathogenetic mechanisms for dermatomyositis and polymyositis, a striking pathological similarity is the expression of MHC-I on non-necrotic muscle ®bres, even on ®bres distant from foci of in¯ammation. In fact, the diagnosis of an in¯ammatory myopathy is sometimes based on the clinical features, other supportive laboratory data (e.g. raised serum creatine kinase, electromyography) and muscle biopsy, showing such expression even in the total absence of in¯ammation. It was noted above that another similarity between dermatomyositis and polymyositis is that anti-Jo1 antibodies are seen in both conditions. A recent study [22 . ] established a possible link between these two observations, and provokes considerable thought, not least about our current assumptions concerning pathological mechanisms. Skeletal muscle ®bres do not constitutively express MHC-I. In an elegant experiment, otherwise normal young mice were made to express MHC-I using a muscle-speci®c promoter system. They developed myositis, with clinical, biochemical and pathological features that paralleled the human disease. In addition, some mice were found to have anti-Jo1 antibodies. This model suggests that the presumed order of events needs to be reconsidered. In other words, it raises the possibility that the in¯ammatory changes and production of autoantibodies may be a secondary phenomenon. If correct, the next question is what triggers the initial expression of MHC-I? It has also been suggested that the myopathology in patients with anti-Jo1 antibodies may have some speci®c features [23 . ].

Treatment

Unfortunately, since last reviewed in this journal [24] there have been no substantial developments. Steroids remain the mainstay of treatment. It is easier to judge response, and thus to adjust therapy accordingly, in patients who present acutely. It is very much more dif®cult in those with chronic disease, particularly if the serum creatine kinase is normal. Of some interest was the small study of eight patients [25 . ] treated from diagnosis with pulsed oral dexamethasone. Further studies are needed to ascertain whether this really does offer bene®t over traditional regimes. We need more information about the value of other immunosuppressant (`steroid-sparing') drugs. Experts in the ®eld do not always agree, re¯ecting the lack of controlled trials and prejudiced personal opinion. The literature is littered with contradictory single case reports or small series concerning the use of such drugs (e.g. azathioprine, methotrexate, cyclosporin, cyclophosphamide, mycophenylate mofetil).

Inclusion body myositis

This is the commonest acquired myopathy in the elderly. It is substantially commoner in men. A recent Dutch study [26 . ] estimated the prevalence to be 4.9 per million population, but the authors suspected that that was an underestimate. In western Australia, the prevalence was found to be 9.3 per million [27 . ]. There have been a few developments in our understanding of the condition since the topic was last reviewed in this journal [28]. The fundamental question of aetiology remains unanswered. Disappointingly, further studies have failed to show signi®cant clinical bene®t from intravenous immunoglobulin therapy. The failure of clinical response to immunosuppression, even though repeat muscle biopsy shows a resolution of in¯ammation, is one of the main reasons why some doubt that IBM should be classi®ed as an in¯ammatory myopathy. That is, it suggests that the in¯ammatory changes could be just an epiphenomenon.

Clinical aspects

The most typical picture is of a man presenting in late middle age with symptoms relating to quadriceps weakness. On examination, the thighs are wasted, and weakness, often asymptomatic, of the ®nger ¯exor muscles is observed. There may also be weakness of ankle dorsi¯exion. The muscle involvement is often asymmetric. Dysphagia is relatively common. The rate of progression is slow, but eventually there may be substantial disability. More data about the natural history is gradually emerging [29 . ]. Rarely, patients present at a much younger age. Familial cases of otherwise typical sporadic IBM occur, usually siblings rather than parent± child. It has been associated with a range of autoimmune disorders and autoantibodies.

Pathology and pathogenesis

There are many pathological similarities to polymyositis, including the partial invasion of non-necrotic muscle ®bres and the expression of MHC-I on otherwise normal-looking ®bres. In¯ammatory in®ltrates may be sparse or plentiful. Speci®c features include groups of atrophic ®bres, rimmed vacuoles, and nuclear or cytoplasmic ®laments. A number of proteins have been shown to accumulate in damaged ®bres, including amyloid and phosphorylated tau. Whether these are the result of chronic damage, and thus entirely a secondary phenomenon, or play a primary role in the pathological process remains much debated. There are striking similarities at a pathological level to the changes seen in the brain in Alzheimer's disease. One view is that the overexpression of amyloid betaprecursor protein is an early event in the pathological process [30 . . ], but other experts continue to have reservations about the order of events and the primacy or otherwise of the observed changes. Another recent observation also questioned the earliest event in IBM. The expression of alphaB-crystallin, a heat shock protein, is markedly enhanced in abnormal ®bres in IBM, but also in ®bres without apparent structural abnormality [31 . ].

Ragged red ®bres, cytochrome oxidase-negative ®bres and multiple mitochondrial DNA deletions are common in IBM, and that raised the question of whether mitochondrial dysfunction might be the cause of the disease, with other pathological changes, including in¯ammation, being secondary. Phosphorus magnetic resonance spectroscopy studies [32] showed that even in affected muscles there is no evidence of a primary metabolic abnormality.

Treatment

It is generally perceived that typical IBM responds poorly, if at all, to steroids and `steroid-sparing' drugs, and that any such response is outweighed by the undoubted morbidity of such treatment, particularly in an elderly population. Such a conclusion is probably correct, but it has not been formally assessed in a randomized controlled trial. Furthermore, there is no doubt that occasional patients respond to treatment, sometimes dramatically. In one such case it was questioned whether the presence of anti-Jo1 antibody might have been an indicator of responsiveness [33 . ]. In another, IBM associated with a monoclonal gammopathy responded to immunoabsorption [34]. Is IBM associated with an immunological abnormality more likely to respond to immunotherapy than IBM alone? Clearly, we do not yet know, and only formal studies will tell. In the meantime, perhaps one should consider a trial of immunosuppression in individual IBM patients, particularly if the clinical picture is atypical.

Earlier reports raised the suggestion of bene®t from intravenous immunoglobulin [35]. Unfortunately, a further controlled study failed to show bene®t [36 . . ].

Conclusion

The past year has not seen the answers to the two most fundamental questions about the idiopathic in¯ammatory myopathies. What is their cause? What is their treatment? Increasingly, it seems that IBM should be considered separately from dermatomyositis and polymyositis. There remains strong evidence that fundamentally different immune processes are taking place in dermatomyositis and polymyositis; but if so, why do they share some common pathological features such as MHC-1 expression and anti-Jo1 antibody production? Are the protein accumulations in IBM telling us about the origins of the disease, or distracting us from the primary cause? Are the in¯ammatory changes in IBM a cause or a consequence of the disease? Dermatomyositis and polymyositis respond to immunosuppression, but what is the optimal approach with currently available therapies? Should we be treating patients with IBM? If so, all or some selected on the basis of clinical or laboratory criteria? Multicentre trials are desperately needed. The current blunderbuss approach to immunosuppressant therapy must eventually be replaced by speci®c immunotherapies, but that depends upon learning more about the afferent and efferent limbs of the immune response. These are some of the challenges for the future.

Table 1 .1The inflammatory myopathiesIdiopathic(1) Dermatomyositis(2) Polymyositis(3) Inclusion body myositisAssociated with collagen vascular diseases(1) Systemic lupus erythematosus(2) Mixed connective tissue disease(3) Scleroderma(4) Sjo È gren's syndrome(5) Rheumatoid arthritisInfective(1) Viral(2) Parasitic(3) Bacterial(4) FungalMiscellaneous(1) Eosinophilic myositis(2) Associated with vasculitis(3) Granulomatous(4) Graft versus host disease(5) Macrophagic myofasciitis

