Inclusion body myositis: genetic factors, aberrant protein expression, and autoimmunity

Sporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM) is an inflammatory myopathy mainly affecting elderly individuals. It has a chronic progressive course leading to severe disability. Immunosuppressive treatment is in most instances ineffective. S-IBM is morphologically characterized by mononuclear cell infiltrates and vacuolated muscle fibers with pathologic accumulation of a large number of different proteins. Recent research has focused on the expression of various factors that may contribute to the inflammatory reaction and the typical inclusions. This review summarizes the new information on genetic factors, abnormal protein expression and inflammation, which provides a basis for linking the different typical morphologic features of s-IBM to a cascade of pathogenic events.

Sporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM) is an inflammatory myopathy usually presenting in patients >50 years of age. The typical filamentous inclusions were first described in the late 1960s [1], and the term inclusion body myositis was introduced in 1971 [2]. The risk for the patients to become severely disabled and wheelchairbound within 10-15 years after onset of symptoms is high [3]. In spite of being considered an inflammatory muscle disorder there is no efficient treatment of s-IBM [4,5].

This review summarizes the most recent studies on factors involved in the pathogenesis of s-IBM. Most strategies in identifying such factors have originated from the morphologic changes that are typically present in s-IBM muscle (Fig. 1). These changes include inflammatory cell infiltration with auto aggressive CD8+ T cells, which invade nonnecrotic muscle fibers. Muscle fibers with "rimmed vacuoles" and inclusions consisting of cytoplasmic (and occasional intranuclear) 15-20 nm tubulofilaments constitute the morphologic hallmark of s-IBM [6]. These filaments, which are usually found in association with the rimmed vacuoles, may also appear as paired helical filaments, depending on the tissue preparation. In addition, there are other common but less specific changes, including frequent muscle fibers with proliferation of defective mitochondria [7,8], interstitial fibrosis, and muscle fiber atrophy.

Aberrant expression of proteins

The nature and composition of the filamentous inclusions and other material associated with the "rimmed vacuoles" have been extensively investigated during the last few years. After the first discovery that the vacuolated muscle fibers contain deposits of amyloid [9], a large number of different proteins have been found to be accumulated in vacuolated muscle fibers in s-IBM. Askanas and Engel [10••] demonstrated that several of the proteins that are pathologically accumulated in the brain in Alzheimer disease (AD) are also present in vacuolated muscle fibers in s-IBM. They have recently summarized their observations in an extensive review including a discussion on the pathogenesis of s-IBM. Most of their studies are based on immunocytochemical analysis at light-as well as at electron-microscopic levels. Some of the studied proteins have also been investigated at mRNA level by in situ hybridization. Amyloid-␤ precursor protein (A␤PP) epitopes were associated with 6-10 nm filaments, whereas epitopes of several other proteins were Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) are a family of serine/threonine kinases, which are important for cellular signal transduction. They are induced by various factors such as hormones, growth factors and cytokines including transforming growth factor-␤1 (TGF-␤1), interleukin-1␤ (IL-1␤), and tumor necrosis factor-␣ (TNF-␣) [18,19]. They play a role in regulating phosphorylation and the upregulated expression of the MAPKs p42MAPK and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) may be of importance for the occurrence of hy- Based on the finding that Elk-1, a nuclear transcription factor that is activated by ERK, is accumulated together with ERK on the surface of frequent myonuclei in vacuolated muscle fibers in s-IBM, it was suggested that there is an impaired molecular transport from the cytoplasm into the nuclei in s-IBM [22•].

Upregulation of another protein kinase, cyklindependent kinase 5, in vacuolated muscle fibers was in a recent study proposed to be a factor of pathogenetic importance for the abnormal accumulation of phosphorylated cytoskeletal proteins in muscle fibers in s-IBM [23].

A possible clue to the mysterious etiology of s-IBM was obtained from a study on ␣B-crystallin (␣BC) in s-IBM [24••]. In addition to vacuolated muscle fibers and fibers invaded by mononuclear cells, apparently normal muscle fibers frequently expressed upregulated ␣BC in s-IBM. These structurally normal fibers with ␣BC expression, which were assigned "X-fibers," were almost specific for s-IBM. Since ␣BC belongs to the family of small heat shock proteins and is upregulated at cellular stress it was suggested that biologic stress of muscle fibers precedes the structural alterations in s-IBM. The upregulation of ␣BC in muscle fibers invaded by mononuclear cells also raises the possibility that ␣BC is the autoantigen triggering the inflammatory response.

Genetic factors

Sporadic IBM

Various approaches have been applied in the search for susceptibility genes that could help explaining the etiology and pathogenesis of s-IBM. Thus genes encoding for some of the abnormally accumulated proteins have been investigated. On the background of mitochondrial abnormalities the mitochondrial genome (mtDNA) has been investigated. Because s-IBM is an inflammatory myopathy with possible autoimmune etiology or pathogenesis, associations with human leukocyte antigen (HLA) haplotypes have been studied. Another approach has been to study genes or gene products shown to be associated with hereditary myopathies with similar histopathologic alterations ie, rimmed vacuoles with inclusions of 15-20 nm tubulofilaments. Table 1 presents a summary of the genetic studies and what has been found [25][26][27][28][29][30][31][32][33][34][35][36][37][38]. Multiple mtDNA deletions are present in muscle in s-IBM. They are focally accumulated at the site of COX deficiency [36] mtDNA variants have been reported to be associated with various disorders including AD A 16311C variant was more frequent in s-IBM than in controls [37] Poly (A) binding protein2 PABP2

OPMD is a hereditary myopathy with rimmed vacuoles similar to s-IBM and is associated with a trinucleotide expansions in PABP2.

No trinucleotide expansion in PABP2 in s-IBM [38] AD, Alzheimer disease; apoE, apolipoprotein E; COX, cytochrome C oxidase; S-IBM, sporadic inclusion body myositis.

Inclusion body myositis Oldfors and Fyhr 471

Homocygocity of valine or methionine at codon 129 of the prion protein gene may predispose to development of Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease and other prion diseases. Prion protein (PrP) is one of the abnormally accumulated proteins in vacuolated fibers of s-IBM [10••]. These observations prompted a study on the PrP gene (PRNP), which showed higher prevalence of methionine homozygosity at codon 129 in the PrP gene in 22 s-IBM patients compared with controls [25]. However, in a recent study on 41 s-IBM patients this association could not be verified [26]. In addition, it was demonstrated that upregulation of prion protein in skeletal muscle is not specific for s-IBM but occurs also in other inflammatory myopathies and in denervation atrophy [39•].

There is strong evidence that HLA alleles are risk factors for s-IBM. The strongest association is with HLA-DR3, but in many cases this is only part of an association with an extended ancestral haplotype marked by HLA-DR3/B8. To identify a possible susceptibility gene, recombinations of the most frequent ancestral HLA haplotype in s-IBM patients were analyzed [35]. Using this strategy the possible susceptibility gene was mapped to the region between HLA-DR and C4. One of these candidate genes is the receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) [35].

Homoplasmic mtDNA variants have been associated with various diseases. Previously demonstrated mtDNA variants associated with Alzheimer disease were not present in s-IBM [37]. However, phylogenetic analysis of the D-loop region disclosed a common polymorphism, 16311C, in many s-IBM patients. This finding may indicate the presence of a pathogenic mutation in the coding region of mtDNA in a subgroup of patients. Such a mutation could be involved in some aspects of s-IBM.

Hereditary inclusion body myopathies

There are several hereditary myopathies with rimmed vacuoles and inclusions consisting of 15-20 nm filaments. Among these disorders are the so-called hereditary inclusion body myopathies (h-IBM) [40]. The most common types of autosomal recessive h-IBM: "rimmed vacuole myopathy sparing the quadriceps" (affecting Persian Jews and other ethnic groups) and "autosomal recessive distal myopathy" (Japan) have been linked to chromosome 9p1-q1 and may be allelic diseases [41].

Welander distal myopathy and tibial muscular dystrophy are autosomal dominant distal myopathies, which have been linked to chromosome 2p13 and 2q31, respectively [42,43]. Titin, a sarcomeric protein, is the candidate gene in tibial muscular dystrophy. In addition to these disorders, oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy may show frequent muscle fibers with rimmed vacuoles and typical IBM filaments. The genetic defect in oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy is in the poly (A) binding protein 2 gene (PABP2), but the relation between the genetic defect and rimmed vacuoles remains obscure. No PABP2 changes have been identified in s-IBM [38].

A Swedish autosomal dominant h-IBM with proximal muscle weakness was recently described and linked to chromosome 17p13. The genetic defect associated with the disease was identified as a missense mutation in the myosin heavy chain (MyHC) IIa gene [44••]. MyHCs are normally degraded by proteasomes, a high molecular weight protein complex involved in ubiquitin and ATPdependent proteolysis [45]. Proteasomes are increased in vacuolated muscle fibers in distal myopathy with rimmed vacuoles [46], indicating that this degradation system is involved in the pathogenesis of rimmed vacuoles. In this context it is of interest that MyHC in addition to A␤PP have been identified in the large fraction of insoluble proteins that are present in s-IBM muscle [15••]. Because an MyHC gene mutation may be the primary cause of muscle fiber degeneration and the occurrence of rimmed vacuoles, increased degradation of MyHC and other sarcomeric proteins may be a key event in the pathogenesis of rimmed vacuoles.

Inflammatory reaction

The inflammatory reaction in s-IBM is characterized by interstitial mononuclear cell infiltrates, mainly composed of T cells and macrophages. An autoimmune pathogenesis is supported by the presence of CD8+ cytotoxic T cells that surround and invade non-necrotic muscle fibers expressing MHC class I antigen. Disturbed immunoregulation is also suggested by the presence of autoantibodies [47,48].

Recent findings support the concept that the autoinvasive CD8+ T cells are specifically selected and clonally expanded in situ [49]. Clonal restriction of T cell receptor (TCR) expression was shown to persist over time [50••]. In a study on three s-IBM patients there was a limited usage of TCR over a period of 19-22 months. Sequence analysis of the complementarity determining region 3 (CDR3) of TCR V␤6 expressing T cells showed identical rearrangements in the multiple muscle biopsies in two of three patients. The results suggest a response to a persistent antigenic stimulation in muscle. The type of antigen is so far not identified although different candidates have been suggested. In two case reports a viral etiology was discussed [51,52].

Cytokines are important molecules in inflammatory response and immune regulation. The expression of many proinflammatory cytokines, such as IL-1␣, IL-1␤, and TNF-␣, as well as the inhibitory cytokine TGF-␤, have been demonstrated in muscle tissue of s-IBM as well as in other idiopathic inflammatory myopathies [53••]. In s-IBM and polymyositis, TNF-␣ was identified in monocytes and macrophages and the corresponding receptors were identified in a subset of inflammatory cells and in vessel walls [54].

Chemokines are important proteins that induce directional migration of inflammatory cells into immunologically active sites. The expression of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) and macrophage inflammatory protein 1␣ (MIP-1␣) have been investigated in s-IBM and other idiopathic inflammatory myopathies. MCP-1 was expressed by mononuclear and endothelial cells [55]. In another study MCP-1 and MIP-1␣ were identified in infiltrating inflammatory cells and also in neighboring extracellular matrix [56]. During the course of s-IBM the muscle tissue is replaced by fibrous tissue and fat. The underlying mechanisms for muscle fiber injury and death are not known. T cell mediated cytotoxicity is mainly mediated by perforin/granzymes or Fas/Fas ligand system. Although Fas/Fas ligand and perforin/granzymes have been demonstrated, apoptosis of muscle cells has not been shown to be of significance in s-IBM. There are several explanations for this low occurrence of apoptosis. Upregulation of proteins promoting cell survival such as bcl-2, bcl-x l , and cyclin dependent kinase inhibitors could protect T cells as well as muscle cells from apoptosis [59,60]. The resistance of muscle to Fas-mediated apoptosis has been proposed to be due to the expression of FLICE (Fas-mediated death domain-like IL-1-converting enzyme)-inhibitory protein (FLIP) in muscle fibers and on muscle infiltrating lymphocytes [61•]. In addition, FLIP was expressed in cultured human skeletal muscle cells stimulated with the proinflammatory cytokines TNF-␣ and IFN-␥. An evolutionary conserved cell death suppressor is human inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP)-like protein (hILP), which is abundantly expressed in muscle [62•]. The expression of hILP may prevent the induction of apoptosis by inhibiting the caspase activation.

Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs

Conclusions

The enigmatic pathogenesis of s-IBM has still not been resolved in spite of numerous investigations. However, new information has shed light on many aspects of s-IBM.

One important question is whether the inflammatory reaction is a primary event triggered by for example a virus infection, or if the inflammation is just a secondary reaction. Several facts suggest that the inflammatory reaction is an early "upstream" event. One is that nonnecrotic muscle fibers invaded by mononuclear cells generally are several-fold more frequent than fibers displaying any other typical pathologic alterations such as rimmed vacuoles [63]. It is our experience that patients with the typical clinical appearance of s-IBM combined with the histologic picture of a myopathy with rimmed vacuoles always exhibit inflammatory reaction in their muscle. Upregulation of MHC class I is a consistent finding in s-IBM, even in biopsies lacking inflammatory cell infiltration [64]. The strong association with HLA DR3 is another indication of autoimmune pathogenesis of IBM.

Inflammation may affect the muscle tissue by infiltration of inflammatory cells in muscle fibers as well as by the action of cytokines. Cytokines may have a direct effect on muscle cell metabolism or may affect muscle fibers indirectly by involvement of blood vessels and changes in the extracellular environment [53]. Thus the upregulation of ␣BC [24], as a sign of muscle cell stress, could be secondary to TNF-␣ stimulation and other factors [65]. Aging is probably an additional factor of importance for the occurrence of rimmed vacuoles in h-IBM as well as in s-IBM [66].

We hypothesize that chronic inflammation, in addition to aging of the muscle, may be the most important factors for initialization of degradation of sarcomeric proteins in s-IBM. This is followed by secondary accumulation of the various proteins that are associated with rimmed vacuoles. An s-IBM susceptibility gene, which is associated with MHC [35], may cause predisposition to develop chronic myositis, which according to our hypothesis is a prerequisite to develop s-IBM. Oxidative stress may contribute to the degenerative changes in vacuolated fibers as previously proposed [67].

Further research on the effects of cytokines on muscle metabolism, identification of susceptibility genes as well as identification of the primary genetic defect in additional h-IBM families may provide clues to the etiology and pathogenesis of s-IBM. • 20 Li M, Dalakas MC: The muscle mitogen-activated protein kinase is altered in sporadic inclusion body myositis. Neurology 2000, 54:1665-1670. The increased expression of MAPKs in vacuolated muscle fibers in s-IBM indicate that hyperphosphorylated myofibrillar proteins may be involved in the primary disease process.

• 21 Wilczynski GM, Engel WK, Askanas V: Association of active extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase with paired helical filaments of inclusion-body myositis muscle suggests its role in inclusion-body myositis tau phosphorylation. Am J Pathol 2000, 156:1835-1840. The results from this investigation suggest that ERK may be involved in the pathogenesis of protein accumulation and filament formation in vacuolated muscle fibers.

• This is the first h-IBM with a defined genetic defect. The mutation in a myosin heavy chain gene gives further support to the concept that degradation of sarcomeric proteins is of importance for the formation of IBM rimmed vacuoles. In spite of being a congenital myopathy rimmed vacuoles appeared only in adults indicating that aging is another important factor.

Acknowledgments

Studies performed by the authors and cited in this review were supported by grants from the Swedish Medical Research Council (Project no. 7122), King Gustav the V 80th Anniversary Fund, and The Swedish Rheumatism Association.

References and recommended reading

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. Typical morphologic features of sporadic inclusion body myositis

) comprise endoproteinases induced by cytokines and secreted by inflammatory cells. They enhance T cell migration and adhesion and they degrade components of the extracellular matrix proteins. Immunocytochemistry has shown upregulation of MMP-2 and MMP-9 on muscle membrane of MHC class I-expressing muscle fibers invaded by CD8+ T cells [57•]. MMP-9 was also localized to some of the autoinvasive CD8+ T cells. Increased levels of mRNA expression of MMP-1 and MMP-9 have been found in another study [58•]. It was suggested that MMPs are of importance for the pathogenesis of s-IBM and other idiopathic inflammatory myopathies and that MMP inhibitors may be of potential therapeutic value.

Table 1 . Summary of findings in studies on genes possibly involved in the pathogenesis of sporadic inclusion body myositis1Gene(s) or locusRationale for investigationResultsReferencesPrion protein (PrP c )Homozygocity for valine or methionine atMethionine homozygosity at codon[25]PRNPcodon 129 predisposes to prion129 in PRNP is more prevalentdiseases and PrP c is accumulated inin s-IBM than in controlsvacuolated muscle fibers in s-IBMThe Met/Met polymorphism is not[26]more prevalent in s-IBMcompared to controls␤-amyloid (A␤) precursor proteinMutations in the A␤PP gene areNo mutations were identified in the[27](A␤PP)associated with familial forms of AD. A␤A␤PP gene in s-IBMand other A␤PP epitopes areaccumulated in the brain in AD and invacuolated muscle fibers in s-IBMapoEThe 4 variant of apoE has beenHigh frequency of apoE-4 in[28]APOEassociated with early onset and rapids-IBMprogress of sporadic and familialNo increased prevalens of[29,30,31]Alzheimer disease and apoE has beenApoE-4 in s-IBMdemonstrated in the brain in AD and invacuolated muscle fibers in s-IBMHuman major histocompatibilityAutoimmune diseases including idiopathicIn s-IBM there is a strong[32,33,34]complex (MHC)inflammatory myopathies are oftenassociation with HLA DR3HLAassociated with specific HLA alleles orA potential site for the[35]extended haplotypes in the MHC genesusceptibility gene is in theregionregion between HLA DR and C4Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)Ragged red muscle fibers, showingdeficiency of COX, which is encodedby mtDNA, are frequently seen in s-IBM.

Dalakas MC, Koffman B, Fujii M, et al.: A controlled study of intravenous immunoglobulin combined with prednisone in the treatment of IBM. Neurology 2001, 56:323-327. This extensive review summarizes most of the various aspects of abnormal accumulations of proteins in muscle fibers in s-IBM. There is an interesting discussion about the pathogenic cascade with an emphasis on abnormal signal-transduction and transcription leading to A␤PP upregulation and oxidative stress. 11 Arnardottir S, Ansved T, Nennesmo I, et al.: Report of a patient with inclusion body myositis and CD8+ chronic lymphocytic leukaemia -post-mortem analysis of muscle and brain. Acta Neurol Scand 2001, 103:131-135. This is the first report that ␣-synuclein may have a function in normal muscle and in muscle pathology. This elegant study demonstrates that the large fraction of high molecular weight insoluble proteins contain sarcomeric proteins and A␤PP among others. Evidence is provided that transglutaminases 1 and 2 are important for the formation of insoluble amyloid deposits. • 16 Baron P, Galimberti D, Meda L, et al.: Synergistic effect of ␤-amyloid protein and interferon gamma on nitric oxide production by C2C12 muscle cells. Brain 2000, 123:374-379. The study demonstrates that IFN-␥ together with A␤ peptides may induce oxidative stress in cultured muscle cells by activation of iNOS. 17 Broccolini A, Engel WK, Alvarez RB, et al.: Redox factor-1 in muscle biopsies of patients with inclusion-body myositis. Neurosci Lett 2000, 287:1-4. 18 Clerk A, Harrison JG, Long CS, et al.: Pro-inflammatory cytokines stimulate mitogen-activated protein kinase subfamilies, increase phosphorylation of c-Jun and ATF2 and upregulate c-Jun protein in neonatal rat ventricular myocytes. J Mol Cell Cardiol 1999, 31:2087-2099. 19 Reimann T, Hempel U, Krautwald S, et al.: Transforming growth factor-beta1 induces activation of Ras, Raf-1, MEK and MAPK in rat hepatic stellate cells. FEBS Lett 1997, 403:57-60.6Griggs RC, Askanas V, DiMauro S, et al.: Inclusion body myositis and myopa-thies. Ann Neurol 1995, 38:705-713.7Carpenter S, Karpati G, Eisen A: A morphologic study in polymyositis: cluesto pathogenesis of different types. In Recent advances in myology. Edited byBradley W. Amsterdam: Excerpta Medica, 1975:374-379.8Oldfors A, Larsson NG, Lindberg C, et al.: Mitochondrial DNA deletions ininclusion body myositis. Brain 1993, 116:325-336.9Mendell JR, Sahenk Z, Gales T, et al.: Amyloid filaments in inclusion bodymyositis: novel findings provide insight into nature of filaments. Arch Neurol1991, 48:1229-1234.10 Askanas V, Engel WK: Inclusion-body myositis: newest concepts of patho-••genesis and relation to aging and Alzheimer disease. J Neuropathol Exp Neu-rol 2001, 60:1-14.13 Broccolini A, Engel WK, Alvarez RB, et al.: Paired helical filaments of inclu-sion-body myositis muscle contain RNA and survival motor neuron protein.Am J Pathol 2000, 156:1151-1155.14 Askanas V, Alvarez RB, Engel WK: Beta-amyloid precursor epitopes inmuscle fibers of inclusion body myositis. Ann Neurol 1993, 34:551-560.15 Choi YC, Park GT, Kim TS, et al.: Sporadic inclusion body myositis correlates••with increased expression and cross-linking by transglutaminases 1 and 2. JBiol Chem 2000, 275:8703-8710.• 12 Askanas V, Engel WK, Alvarez RB, et al.: Novel immunolocalization of ␣-synuclein in human muscle of inclusion-body myositis, regenerating and necrotic muscle fibers, and at neuromuscular junctions. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2000, 59:592-598.

