Production of IL-6 by human myoblasts stimulated with A␤ Relevance in the pathogenesis of IBM

Article abstract-Objective: To determine whether amyloid-␤ protein (A␤) can induce the production of proinflammatory cytokines by cultured normal muscle cells. Background: Sporadic inclusion body myositis (IBM) is characterized by the presence of rimmed vacuoles and fibrillary inclusions of A␤ in muscle fibers, and often inflammatory cells. Endomysial expression of proinflammatory molecules has suggested an ongoing immune process, but the site of sensitization and the mechanisms that trigger an inflammatory reaction is unknown. Methods: The authors used Northern blot analysis and specific immunoassays to study the expression and secretion in cell-free supernatants of tumor necrosis factor-␣ (TNF␣), interleukin-1␤ (IL-1␤), and interleukin-6 (IL-6) by purified human myoblasts and C2C12 mouse skeletal muscle cells incubated with A␤ [1-42] or A␤ [25-35] peptides. Results: Nonstimulated muscle cells produced detectable IL-6, whereas secretion of IL-1␤ and TNF␣ was absent. Incubation with A␤ peptides increased IL-6 production, whereas TNF␣ and IL-1␤ levels remained undetectable. Northern blot analysis of A␤-stimulated human myoblasts revealed an increase in IL-6 mRNA expression. Conclusions: Cultured muscle cells increase the constitutive production of IL-6 in response to local deposition of A␤ in sporadic IBM. IL-6 could be a CD8 ϩ proliferation and differentiation agent, an autocrine proteolysisinducing factor of damaged myotubes, and a proliferation-stimulating agent for satellite cells to replace the destroyed myofibers in IBM. NEUROLOGY 2001;57:1561-1565   Muscle biopsies of inclusion body myositis (IBM) patients show striking pathologic features including abnormal accumulation of amyloid-␤ protein (A␤) within muscle fibers 1,2 and mononuclear cell inflammation, 3 which have received considerable attention regarding the pathogenesis of IBM. [4][5][6] However, the role of inflammatory reactions in muscle tissue damage and the mechanisms triggering the production of proinflammatory mediators in IBM have not been clarified yet. 7 Recently, we showed that cultured muscle cells stimulated with A␤ peptides, in the presence of interferon-␥ (IFN␥), produce nitric oxide (NO), 8 supporting a role for A␤ deposition in the pathogenesis of postulated oxidative damage in IBM. 9 We further examined the effect of A␤ on cultured myogenic cells, testing the hypothesis that they participate in the production of proinflammatory cytokines through interaction with A␤ deposition. We approached this issue by analyzing the effect of A␤ [25-35] and A␤ [1-42] peptides on human muscle cells cultured at clonal density as well as on C2C12 cells, which are a skeletal myoblast cell line derived from the hindlimb of normal mice. 10 Production of tumor necrosis factor-␣ (TNF␣), interleukin-1␤ (IL-1␤), and IL-6 in cell-free supernatants was determined by specific ELISA, whereas the expression of the corresponding mRNA was studied using Northern blot analysis. We demonstrate that in both human and C2C12 muscle cells, A␤ peptides induce gene expression and secretion of IL-6 but do not trigger the production of TNF␣ and IL-1␤. These findings highlight the possibility that in IBM, the interaction of muscle cells with A␤ deposition is responsible for production of IL-6, which can play an important role in local immune response as well as in muscle regeneration. 11,12 Materials and methods. Materials. A␤ [1-42] and A␤ [25-35] peptides as well as their scrambled analogs (Bachem, Hannover, Germany) were resuspended in sterile H 2 O, aliquoted at 1 mg/mL, and kept at Ϫ20 °C. A␤ [1-42] and A␤ [1-42] scrambled were aged for 5 days at 37 °C. Recombinant human TNF␣ and murine TNF␣ (PeproTech House, London, UK) were resuspended in phosphatebuffered saline and kept at Ϫ20 °C.

Muscle cell cultures. Human clonal muscle cultures were derived from muscle obtained from normal adult subjects without neuromuscular disorders undergoing surgical procedures. 13 Briefly, the tissue was dissociated by incubation with trypsin/ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) solution for 20 minutes and resuspended in Ham's F10 medium containing 0.5 mg/mL bovine serum albumin, 0.39 mg/mL dexamethasone, 0.5 mg/mL fetuin, 0.18 mg/mL bovine insulin, 0.25 mg/mL amphotericin B, and enriched by 20% fetal calf serum (all from Gibco BRL, Invitrogen Limited). 14 To isolate single clones, the cell suspension was progressively diluted in clonal medium to give 1.25 cells per milliliter. Individual wells of 96-well plates (Nunc, Naperville, IL) were inoculated with 0.2 mL of cell suspension, and after 2 to 4 days, wells containing single colonies could be identified. When each clone reached 30% to 50% confluency, it was detached with 0.1 mL trypsin/EDTA solution, transferred to a 90-mm Petrie dish, and an aliquot tested for immunoreactivity with mAb anti-Leu 19 antigen (Becton Dickinson, San Jose, CA), which crossreacts with the neural adhesion molecule N-CAM (CD 56) on human myoblasts. 15 Only Leu-19 -positive colonies were finally propagated. The C2C12 murine cell line was provided by European Collection of Animal Cell Cultures. Cells were cultured in Dulbecco's modified eagle medium (DMEM) with 5% glucose, supplemented with 10% heatinactivated fetal bovine serum, 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 mg/mL streptomycin (all from Gibco BRL, Invitrogen Limited). Cells were plated in 96-well plates at a concentration of 1 ϫ 10 4 /100 L per well or in six-well plates at a concentration of 1 ϫ 10 6 /mL per well. After 1 day in culture, nonfused myoblasts were incubated with stimuli for the indicated times; cell-free supernatants were then collected and stored at Ϫ70 °C for subsequent assays. Total RNA was extracted from adherent nonfused myoblasts cultured in six-well plates.

Cytokine assays. Antigenic mouse and human IL-6, IL-1␤, and TNF␣ were detected by ELISA systems (Amersham, Bucks, UK), based on the quantitative "sandwich" enzyme immunoassay technique. The sensitivity of these assays was 1 pg/mL for human IL-6, 15 pg/mL for mouse IL-6, 2 pg/mL for human IL-1␤, and 5 pg/mL for human TNF␣.

RNA extraction and Northern blot analysis. Human myoblasts were plated in six-well plates at a concentration of 1 ϫ 10 6 /mL per well and then incubated with stimuli. Total RNA was extracted and analyzed as previously described. 16 The cDNA fragments encoding human TNF␣, IL-1␤, and IL-6 were labeled with 32 P using a Ready-to-Go Labeling kit (Pharmacia, Uppsala, Sweden) before hybridization of nylon filters and autoradiography. 17 Blots were subsequently rehybridized with a human glyceraldeyde-3phosphate dehydrogenase cDNA probe (Clontech, Palo Alto, CA) as an internal control.

Statistical analysis. Data were expressed as means Ϯ SEM. Statistical evaluation was performed by repeatedmeasure analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Dunnett's test for specific comparisons. Statistical significance was set at p Ͻ 0.05.

Results.

To determine the effect of A␤ peptides on gene expression of TNF␣, IL-1␤, and IL-6 in human muscle, nonfused myoblasts cultured for 1 day were stimulated for 4 hours with 25 mol/L A␤ [1-42] or A␤ [25-35] and then extracted for total RNA. Northern blot analysis (figure 1) shows that human myoblasts do not express mRNA levels for TNF␣ and IL-1␤ either in resting conditions or after stimulation with A␤ peptides or with other stimuli such as TNF␣ or bacterial endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (not shown). However, mRNA levels for IL-6 were expressed at low concentrations and were potentiated after treatment with A␤ [1-42], A␤ [25-35], or TNF␣, but not A␤ [25-35] or A␤ [1-42] scrambled peptides.

Determination of antigenic cytokines in cell-free supernatants harvested from human muscle cultures after as long as 48 hours of incubation revealed that both unstimulated myoblasts and A␤-treated cells did not release TNF␣ and IL-1␤ at levels significantly higher than the detection limits of the assays (5 pg/mL for TNF␣ and 2 pg/mL for IL-1␤) (not shown). Consistently with Northern blot analysis, IL-6 was secreted at detectable levels and production increased after incubation with A␤ [1-42] or A␤ [25-35]  (2.5 Ϯ 0.3-and 2.3 Ϯ 0.2-fold increase above basal levels, p Ͻ 0.05, n ϭ 4 at 24 hours) but not with A␤ [25-35] and A␤ [1-42] scrambled peptides. The effect of A␤ [1-42] and A␤ [25-35] on IL-6 release was dose dependent, with production significant at 2.5 mol/L and progressively increasing to as much as 25 mol/L (figure 2A). Data were also reproduced in C2C12 muscle cells; these cells, stimulated with A␤ [1-42] or A␤ [25-35], also released significant amounts of IL-6 (2.9 Ϯ 0.8-and 2.2 Ϯ 0.4-fold increase above basal levels, p Ͻ 0.05, n ϭ 4 at 24 hours) (see figure 2B). Time course studies revealed that release of IL-6 from human myoblasts in response to A␤ peptides was significantly enhanced above basal levels after 2 hours of incuba- [1-42] and A␤ [25-35] specifically upregulated IL-6 mRNA, whereas their scrambled analogs had no effect. The figure depicts a representative experiment of two performed with similar results. tion, reaching maximal levels after 24 hours of incubation (figure 3).

Figure 1. Effect of A␤ peptides on interleukin-6 (IL-6), IL-1␤, and tumor necrosis factor-␣ (TNF␣) mRNA expression by human myoblasts. Human myoblasts, cultured in sixwell plates, were stimulated for 4 hours with 25 mol/L amyloid-␤ protein (A␤) peptides or 10 ng/mL TNF␣. Total RNA was purified and analyzed by Northern blot analysis. Hybridizations with human IL-6, IL-1␤, TNF␣, and glyceraldeyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (G3PDH) cDNA are shown. Both A␤

Discussion. In this study, we examined the effect of A␤ peptides on the production of proinflammatory cytokines by highly purified human muscle cells. We provide evidence that human myoblasts secrete IL-6 under basal conditions and in response to A␤ protein. Both A␤ [25-35] and A␤ [1-42] peptides were potent inducers of IL-6 secretion through an increase of IL-6 -specific mRNA. Conversely, myogenic cells did not produce TNF␣ or IL-1␤ either under basal conditions or as a result of stimulation with A␤ peptides. Specificity of the effect of A␤ [25-35] and A␤ [1-42]  was demonstrated using peptides with the same amino acid composition but with a scrambled sequence, which did not influence the production of IL-6 from human and murine muscle cells in vitro. Moreover, the release of IL-6 was also demonstrated in cell-free supernatants from A␤-stimulated murine C2C12 muscle cells, which share functional similarities with human myoblasts. 10 IL-6 is a pleiotropic cytokine that is involved in the promotion of immune responses mainly mediated by B and cytolytic T cells. 18 Unlike TNF␣ and IL-1␤, IL-6 displays fewer inflammatory properties because it is unable to stimulate the synthesis of arachidonic acid metabolites, and it participates in the generation of the IL-1 receptor antagonist, known to inhibit IL-1 responses. 19 IL-6 is produced by normal muscle cells and its expression in vitro is enhanced in response to several proinflammatory agents. 20,21 IL-6, together with IL-1␤ and TNF␣, has been shown to be overexpressed in IBM. 7 Our data sug- [1-42] on IL-6 production by human myoblasts. Human myoblasts were cultured in 96-well plates and stimulated with increasing concentrations of A␤ [1-42] and 10 ng/mL TNF␣. After 24 hours of incubation, supernatants were harvested and assayed for IL-6 accumulation. The effect of A␤ [1-42] was already significant at 2.5 mol/L and increased to 25 mol/L. (B) Effect of A␤ peptides on IL-6 production by C2C12 cells. C2C12 cells were cultured in 96-well plates and stimulated with 25 mol/L A␤ [1-42], A␤ [25-35], A␤ [1-42] scrambled, A␤ [25-35] scrambled, and 10 ng/mL TNF␣. After 24 hours of incubation, supernatants were harvested and assayed for IL-6 production. Both A␤ [1-42]  and A␤ [25-35] specifically upregulated IL-6 production, whereas their scrambled analogs had no effect. Each figure depicts a representative experiment of three performed with similar results. Mean values Ϯ SEM of assays performed with supernatants collected from triplicate wells for each condition are shown. Figure 3. Time-course of interleukin-6 (IL-6) production by human myoblasts in response to amyloid-␤ protein (A␤) peptides. Human myoblasts were cultured in 96-well plates and stimulated for as long as 48 hours with 25 mol/L A␤ [1-42], A␤ [25-35], A␤ [1-42] scrambled, and A␤ [25-35] scrambled. At different times, supernatants were harvested and assayed for IL-6 accumulation. The effect of A␤ [1-42] was already significant at 2 hours and increased for as long as 48 hours. The figure depicts a representative experiment of three performed with similar results. Mean values Ϯ SEM of assays performed with supernatants collected from triplicate wells for each condition are shown.

Figure 2. Effect of amyloid-␤ protein (A␤) peptides on interleukin-6 (IL-6) production by human myoblasts and C2C12 cells. (A) Dose-response effect of A␤

gest that the effect of A␤ on IL-6 production from human myoblasts might be at least partly responsible for the increase in IL-6 expression in the vacuolated fibers of IBM. Interestingly, IL-1␤ and TNF␣ but not IL-6 have been shown to be produced by A␤-stimulated human monocytes. 17,22 Therefore, we believe that one of the pathologic mechanisms leading to cytokine expression in IBM is dependent on A␤ deposition, which can activate both myogenic cells to release IL-6 and mononuclear phagocytes to secrete IL-1␤ and TNF␣, which, in turn, may also enhance the production of IL-6 by muscle cells. 20,21 In this regard, it has been shown that human macrophages found in muscle of various muscle diseases, including IBM, demonstrate strong immunoreactivity and mRNA for ␤-amyloid precursor protein (␤APP), suggesting that the abnormal accumulation of the correspondent protein is generated, at least partly, by locally increased transcription outside vacuolated muscle fibers. 23 Moreover, interstitial macrophages and those phagocytosing muscle fibers in IBM have been shown to be positive for antibodies against proinflammatory cytokines. 24 A issue raised by our study is the pathophysiologic role of extracellular A␤ because A␤ in IBM is primarily deposited intracellularly. However, in some abnormal muscle fibers in IBM, the accumulation of ␤APP appears to extend outside the muscle fiber boundary. This may have been attributable to a fragility of the fiber's surface membrane, which could have been transiently broken. 25 Alternatively, it is also possible that muscle fibers in IBM secrete A␤. This mechanism has been demonstrated in normal muscle fibers in culture, which secrete A␤ [1-40] and A␤ [1-42] and those secretions are greatly increased in ␤APP-overexpressing cultured muscle fibers. 26 Therefore, even though intracellular overexpression of the ␤APP gene in muscle can produce several aspects of the IBM cellular phenotype, 5,26 it is possible that extracellular A␤ deposition in IBM exert additional effects.

Our data showing that myoblasts in vitro can increase production of IL-6 after A␤ stimulation could help in solving the dilemma of IBM, explaining why immune suppression could never get rid of the disease. The antigen would be in fact hidden within the muscle and could induce the immune response only when leaked to the extracellular space. Obviously, more studies are needed to demonstrate definitively the role of A␤ in IBM. The direct injection of A␤ into the muscle and monitoring the tissue response for inflammation could be important in further understanding the in vivo effect of extracellular A␤. Conversely, A␤ gene transfer could be a very suitable model to investigate the role of intracellular A␤ in triggering cytokine production by muscle cells.

Regardless of the intrinsic or extracellular exposure of muscle fibers to A␤, IL-6 production might be important several ways in the pathophysiology of IBM. IL-6 could synergize with IL-1␤ and TNF␣ in costimulating immune responses. For example, the combination of IL-1␤ and IL-6 could induce naive CD8 ϩ cytotoxic T cells to proliferate and acquire lytic capabilities in the absence of help from accessory and CD4 ϩ cells. 27 The positive effect of IL-6 on B-cell differentiation and thus in antibody production could also account for the B-cell activation previously suggested in IBM. 28 When dealing with the muscle tissue, however, we have to take into account the direct effects of IL-6 on muscle cells; it can stimulate proteolysis in C2C12 myotubes in vitro and induce myoblast proliferation to replace the destroyed myofibers. 11,29 In this regard, because IL-6 has been shown to be expressed in regenerating skeletal muscle, the proliferation rate of myoblasts grown in the presence of IL-6 may add to the evidence that this cytokine contributes to the regenerating capacity of the muscle by modulating the behavior of muscle precursor cells. 12 

Figure. (A)

There is a small frontal extradural hematoma (arrowhead) and a 0.5-mL hematoma in the left cerebellar hemisphere (arrow). (B) Dramatic expansion of the cerebellar hematoma and surrounding edema have nearly obliterated the fourth ventricle (arrow). Dilatation of the lateral ventricular temporal horns (arrowhead) indicates obstructive hydrocephalus.

Acknowledgment

The authors thank the Associazione Amici del Centro Dino Ferrari.

Neuro Images

Evolving traumatic cerebellar hematoma Andrew J. Martin, FRCS, Nicholas W.M. Thomas, FRCS, London, UK A 10-year-old boy fell from a tree onto concrete. When he was first assessed, he had a headache but had a normal conscious level and no neurologic signs. A cranial CT scan was performed 5 hours after the injury (figure , A). He remained alert, neurologically intact, and cardiovascularly stable for a further 24 hours, but then deteriorated with worsening headache, drowsiness, neck retraction, and left hemiparesis. After a repeated CT scan (see the figure , B) the cerebellar hematoma was evacuated. He recovered completely. Such late delayed expansion of a traumatic intracerebral hematoma is unusual. 1 Possible mechanisms include coagulopathy (absent in this case) and local vascular necrosis or dysautoregulation. 2 

