Transglutaminases in disease

Transglutaminases (TGases) are enzymes that are widely used in many biological systems for generic tissue stabilization purposes. Mutations resulting in lost activity underlie several serious disorders. In addition, new evidence documents that they may also be aberrantly activated in tissues and cells and contribute to a variety of diseases, including neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's and Huntington's diseases. In these cases, the TGases appear to be a factor in the formation of inappropriate proteinaceous aggregates that may be cytotoxic. In other cases such as celiac disease, however, TGases are involved in the generation of autoantibodies. Further, in diseases such as progressive supranuclear palsy, Huntington's, Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases, the aberrant activation of TGases may be caused by oxidative stress and inflammation. This review will examine the role and activation of TGases in a variety of diseases.

Introduction

Transglutaminases (TGases) are particularly interesting enzymes to consider in the context of pathology because their many functions generally involve either protection and prevention of bodily injury, or tissue assembly and repair. TGases can be thought of as mediators of biological glues. Their most common function is to catalyze the formation of isopeptide linkages between the carboxamide group of proteinbound glutamine residues and the o-amino group of protein-bound lysine residue. 1 Thus, one of the TGase isoforms -factor XIIIa -catalyzes the formation of blood clots and thereby repairs potentially life-threatening injury. TGase 1 cross links the proteins that comprise the cell envelope, a flexible insoluble barrier that lines the outer surface of fully differentiated cells of stratified squamous epithelia, which thereby protects against mechanical and chemical injury, or dehydration in the case of cornified epidermal cells. Similar roles have been ascribed to several other TGase isoforms in epithelia, including TGases 3-7. Supporting the thesis that TGases are critically important to facilitate tissue protective functions is the observation that ancestral forms of these enzymes occur early in evolution (Aeschlimann and Paulsson, 1994). Further, convergent evolution has produced similar enzymes in bacteria (Kanaji et al., 1993;Pasternack et al., 1998).

It is now appreciated that TGases are normally expressed at low levels in many different tissues. Further, it is becoming apparent that TGases are inappropriately activated in a variety of pathologies. With the exception of the diseases involving TGase mutations, however, it is not clear what role TGases are specifically playing in disease etiology. Thus, our purpose in reviewing the pathologies that involve TGases is to understand the common and specific roles of TGases in disease.

Protective roles of TGases in epithelia

One of the major functions of TGases in epithelia is the formation of a cell envelope (CE) barrier structure, which is a complex amalgam of proteins that lines the exterior of the cell and replaces the plasma membrane of the fully differentiated cell. Indeed, seven of the nine known TGase enzymes are active in such tissues and several are now known to directly play consecutive and complementary roles in CE formation. In the specialized case of the cornified epidermis, the CE is composed of two parts: a highly insoluble protein envelope about 10 nm thick and of uniform mass density (about 7 kDa/nm 2 ) and a lipid envelope about 5 nm thick composed of covalently attached ceramide lipids that coats the exterior of the cell (Steinert, 2000). This composite structure provides vital physical and mechanical barrier properties to the epidermal cells, but has little or no water barrier function by itself. This is provided together with a complex array of intercellular lipids, which stack in organized lamellae layers that are themselves organized by the ceramide lipids attached on the surface of the cell. This interplay between the CE and the intercellular lipids affords effective physical, mechanical, chemical and water barrier function.

CE precursor proteins widely used in epithelia include envoplakin, periplakin, involucrin, and various members of the numerous small proline-rich family of proteins. Starting at interdesmosomal sites, these become cross-linked together by several TGase isoforms to form a scaffold. Each specialized epithelium then uses these and/or other proteins to form the reinforced mature CE typical of a given tissue; e.g. in the epidermis, the major reinforcement protein is loricrin (Nemes and Steinert, 1999;Steinert and Marekov, 1999). Direct evidence has now shown that cytosolic TGases, including in particular TGase 3, are responsible for cross-linking various soluble CE proteins into small oligomers. These are then translocated to the cell periphery where they become cross-linked to the growing CE structure by the membrane-anchored TGase 1 enzyme (Kim et al., 1995;Steinert et al., 1998). Both TGases 1 and 3 require proteolytic activation at specific sequence sites. In both cases, there is a 100-1000-fold increase in enzyme specific activity upon maximal activation (Kim et al., 1994). While there is some evidence that calpain is involved (Kim and Bae, 1998), the details of these activation processes remain to be elucidated. In addition, in the epidermis, it is now known that the TGase 1 enzyme can catalyze the formation of ester bonds between the ceramides and the CE proteins envoplakin, periplakin and involucrin (Nemes et al., 1999). The enzyme mechanism is identical to cross link formation, except that an -OH group on the ceramides serves as the nucleophile.

Lamellar ichthyosis

Given the role of TGases in skin development it would be expected that loss or gain of TGase activity should result in pathology (Van Hooijdonk et al., 1991). Indeed, mutations in TGase 1 are responsible for a major form of autosomal recessive ichthyosis, termed lamellar ichthyosis, a disorder of keratinization. This disease occurs spontaneously at a frequency of between 1 and 3× 10 5 individuals. The affected individuals are born embedded in hyperkeratotic skin (collodion-baby syndrome), which later cracks and exposes the underlying tissue, leading to life-threatening dehydration and systemic infections. If the newborn survives the first few months of life, the disease eventually develops into large brown plate-like scales, which cover the entire body surface. In addition, there are numerous other autosomal ichthyoses, some of which might be caused by interference of TGase 1 function. One of these is X-linked ichthyosis, caused by the loss of the cholesterol sulfatase gene, and results in an excessive accumulation of cholesterol sulfate in the skin. Cholesterol sulfate is a known competitive inhibitor of TGase 1 function. It appears to allow greater access of water to the active site, resulting in deamidation of activated glutamine residues rather than reaction to form esters or isopeptide cross-links (Nemes et al., 1999). Interestingly, lamellar ichthyosis affects only the epidermis: other internal 'wet' epithelia, which also abundantly express the TGase 1 enzyme isoform, but do not form a ceramide lipid envelope, are not notably affected. This observation suggests that TGase 1 is perhaps more important for ceramide attachment to proteins by ester formation than for cross-linking CE proteins, a function which perhaps can be replaced by the other TGase isoforms active in the skin. As TGase 1 is the only enzyme isoform known to be associated with membranes, this may explain lamellar ichthyosis disease extent and severity. Cases of lamellar ichthyosis may be homozygous or compound heterozygous, and involve deletions or insertions that result in a nonsense protein, or a truncated protein due to premature chain termination, or splicing errors (Huber et al., 1995;Russell et al., 1995;Petit et al., 1997). The \ 20 known TGase 1 mutations occur randomly throughout the gene and suggest that there are no particular mutational hot spots associated with lamellar ichthyosis (Shevchenko et al., 2000). Not all TGase 1 mutations, however, inactivate the enzyme outright. For example, Candi et al. (1998) identified two mutant forms of TGase 1 in lamellar ichthyosis that have somewhat increased enzyme stability, which ultimately however, interfered with proteolytic activation for optimal enzyme activity and function.

In addition, there are other forms of autosomal ichthyoses clinically similar to lamellar ichthyosis that are not linked to the TGM1 gene locus: four separate loci have been identified that are not linked to the genes for TGase 1, 2 or 3 (Bale et al., 1996;Parmentier et al., 1996;Fischer et al., 2000). Some of these might be caused by mutations in genes whose products are re-quired to process the TGase 1 enzyme into its active form (such as proteases or lipid acyltransferases). Further, the possibility exists that mutations in other TGM genes might cause pathology. However, experimental knockout of the TGM2 gene has no notable phenotype in mice (De Laurenzi and Melino, 2001): does this mean that mutations of this gene do not cause pathology in humans? On the other hand, knockout of the TGM3 gene results in very early embryonic lethality in mice (L. Milstone, personal communication): does this too mean that mutations in this gene will not be found in humans? Finally, it is not proven yet whether any cases of ichthyoses result from significantly elevated TGase activity, but this remains a possibility.

Factor XIIIa deficiency

Factor XIIIa is the TGase isoform that is important for the clotting of blood. In the process of clotting, factor XIIIa catalyzes the formation of o(g-glutamyl)lysine cross-links between fibrin monomers or fibrin and a 2 -plasmin inhibitor. Factor XIIIa is activated by proteolytic cleavage of its proenzyme form, factor XIII. The proteolytic activation of factor XIIIa is mediated by thrombin, in response to Ca 2 + released from platelets at the site of vascular leakage (Ichinose et al., 1986a).

Factor III is a tetramer composed of two A and two B subunits. The A subunit contains the active TGase enzyme and the B subunit is thought to stabilize the overall enzyme complex. In addition to its structural role, the B subunit also contains ten tandem repeats that resemble the GPI structure or Sushi domains (Ichinose et al., 1986b). These domains have been found in more that thirty other proteins and are hypothesized to be important for proteinprotein interactions.

As expected, deficiencies in factor XIIIa activity cause protracted bleeding. At present, bleeding disorders due to factor XIIIa deficiency occur at a frequency of 1-in-5×10 6 individuals in Japan (Hashiguchi et al., 1993;Coggan et al., 1995;Souri et al., 1998;Takahashi et al., 1998). These disorders are classified into two types: type I where both the A and B subunits are mutated, or type II in which the A subunit only is mutated. At present \30 different mutations have been described for factor XIIIa deficiency, and these too are scattered along the entire length of the gene. Since mutations in the B subunit contribute to factor XIIIa deficiency it will be important to discern the functions of this subunit and how these functions impinge on factor XIIIa activity.

Celiac disease: autoimmunity and TGases

TGase antibodies have been found in a number of autoimmune diseases, which suggests the possibility that the inappropriate presentation of TGases to T cells might contribute to these diseases. The immune system has evolved elaborate defenses against the development of autoimmunity and consequently, a reaction against self components usually reflects the aberrant activation of numerous effectors of immunity. Celiac disease will be used as an example here to show how the various parts of the immune system can contribute to autoimmunity.

Celiac disease is characterized by damage to the upper small intestine, causing effacement of the villi to produce a characteristically flat mucosa with markedly hypertrophic crypts (Trier 1991;Marsh, 1992). Consequently, patients with celiac disease usually have difficulty with absorption. The incidence of frank celiac disease ranges from 1:300 in Western Ireland to 1:4700 in other European countries (Mylotte et al., 1973;Sandforth et al., 1991), whereas the frequency of nonsymptomatic celiac disease has been estimated to be as high as 3.3 and 4 per 1000 in Italy and the USA, respectively (Catassi et al., 1994;Not et al., 1998). Celiac disease is precipitated by the ingestion of gliadin, a proteinaceous component of wheat gluten. The disease is found in genetically predisposed individuals (mostly HLA-DQ2 and -DQ8 positive) who mount heightened T cell-mediated and humoral immune responses to gluten, the protein found in wheat, rye, and barley flours. The immunological reaction to gliadin (alcohol fraction of gluten) in the upper small bowel, where ingested dietary components are concentrated, leads to inflammation and the characteristic features of disease (Marsh, 1992). The disorder is now considered to result from a complex interplay of genetic and variable environmental factors in order to explain the wide spectrum of clinical manifestations ranging from asymptomatic to severe malabsorption.

The pathogenesis of CD has recently made rapid progress since the discovery that TGase 2 is an autoimmune antigen of celiac disease (Dieterich et al., 1997). Active celiac disease is accompanied by mucosal autoantibodies to reticulin, a common component of the extracellular matrix. Antireticulin antibodies are identical to antiendomysial autoantibodies that allow a screening for biopsy-proven celiac disease with 100% specificity (Corrao et al., 1994). Immunoprecipitation of proteins from fibrosarcoma cells with IgA from celiac disease patients led to the identification of TGase 2 as the dominant endomysial autoantigen (Dieterich et al., 1997).

Thus the questions is, how does autoimmunity arise? Based on a series of in vitro experiments, TGase 2 is thought to be responsible for generating neoepitopes of gliadin through deamidation of glutamine residues. HLA-DQ molecules have low affinity for unmodified peptides derived from gliadin (Johansen et al., 1996a,b). However, TGase 2 treatment in vitro significantly increases the ability of gliadin fragments to stimulate the proliferation of gliadin-specific T cells (Molberg et al., 1998b;Van de Wal et al., 1998). Mass spectrometric measurements have demonstrated that the effect of TGase is to deamidate the gliadin peptides (Molberg et al., 1998b;Van de Wal et al., 1998). Similar increases in the antigenicity of the gliadin peptides were also obtained by acid-induced deamidation (Molberg et al., 1998b). The deamidation converts glutamines to negatively-charged glutamic acid residues, which in turn increases the affinity for binding sites on HLA-DQ2 and DQ8 (Molberg et al., 1998a;Sjostrom et al., 1998;Van de Wal et al., 1998;Arentz-Hansen et al., 2000). Both HLA-DQ2 and DQ8 preferentially bind negatively-charged peptides (Johnson et al., 1997;Kwok et al., 1996). Interestingly, only T cells derived from the gut of disease patients respond to TGase-modified gliadin peptides. This attests to the organ-specific nature of this disease (Molberg et al., 1998b;Van de Wal et al., 1998).

TGase 2 also cross-links itself onto gliadin in vitro, and it has been suggested that in vivo the cross-linked TGase might act as a hapten for the formation of antibodies against gliadin (Porta et al., 1991;Molberg et al., 1998b;Van de Wal et al., 1998). This is a plausible hypothesis because serum anti-TGase antibody titer falls dramatically when wheat products are removed from the diet. Thus, the presentation of fragments of gliadin cross-linked to TGase 2 results in antibodies against gliadin, TGase 2 and the cross-linked proteins. The greater preponderance of anti-TGase antibodies (Dieterich et al., 1997;Schuppan et al., 1998) presumably reflects the greater antigenicity of this antigen.

The possibility of deamidation of gliadin by TGase 2 has been cited as the first example of an enzymicallygenerated neoepitope in an autoimmune disease (Molberg et al., 1998b;Van de Wal et al., 1998). Despite the elegance of this hypothesis, it is problematic because it is not yet clear how this might occur in vivo because TGase 2 would be acting on gliadin in an environment bereft of amine donors. The experiments demonstrating the antigenicity of TGase-treated gliadin peptides were performed using TGase 2 in the absence of amine donors. One possibility based on in vitro assays is that amine groups on the surface of TGase 2 molecules could serve as nucleophiles. Alternatively, water is the most abundantly available nucleophile, which would result in deamidation. It is also possible that gliadin is deamidated by the strong acids in the stomach. Glutamine comprises approximately 40% of the amino acids of gliadin. Thus, it would be expected that some of these glutaminyl residues would be spared from acidic deamidation to serve as carboxamide donors for the formation of o(g-glutamyl)lysine bonds by TGase 2. How TGase 2 comes in contacts with gliadin remains an interesting question. Compelling data do not yet exist to support the hypothesis that TGase 2 acts as a deaminase of gliadin in vivo, so this area remains an intriguing avenue for further research.

TGase 2 expression in jejunal biopsies of celiac disease patients is elevated by 3.2-fold (Bruce et al., 1985) and it is theoretically possible this contributes to celiac disease by increasing the frequency of gliadin-TGase 2 cross-linking and/or deamidation. However, the source of the increased activity is not yet clear, although endothelial, fibroblast, and mononuclear cells may be the possible rich sources of TGase 2. In addition, stimulation by proinflammatory cytokines is a possible novel mechanism. The inflammatory infiltrates of the jejunal tissues of celiac disease patients are rich in T cells (Molberg et al., 1998a). Of these cells, it is the T helper cells (CD4 + ) that respond to deamidated gliadin (Molberg et al., 1998b;Van de Wal et al., 1998). T helper (Th) cells are separated into three groups based on the cytokines they secrete. Th1 cells predominantly produce interferon g (INF-g), tumor necrosis factor a (TNF-a) and interleukin 2 (IL-2), whereas Th2 cells produce IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-10 and IL-13, and both of these cells are derived from Th0 which secrete a combination of these cytokines. Gluten-specific T cell clones from celiac disease patients secrete cytokines that are consistent with a Th0 cytokines, including significant quantities of INF-g (Nilsen et al., 1998). T cells are not the only source of cytokines as duodenal biopsies from celiac disease patients show increases in INF-g of greater than a 1000-fold relative to samples from normal individuals (Nilsen et al., 1998). Elevations in IL-2, IL-4, IL-6 and TNF-a have also been reported in the celiac disease patients (Nilsen et al., 1998).

Recently, Kim and Steinert (2001) have shown that INF-g can induce expression of TGase 2 in the rat IEC-6 small intestinal cells, and interestingly, TGF-b suppresses TGase 2 expression in that system. Therefore, it was suggested that the increased expression of TGase 2 leading to pathogenesis of celiac disease in genetically predisposed individuals (HLA-DQ2 + ) could be due to increased IFN-g signaling, loss of TGF-b signaling, or both, in the small intestine.

Cytokine imbalance is a major contributor to the development of autoimmune disease and reflects an inability of T cells to resolve the disease. For example, INF-g stimulates the cell surface expression of HLA II molecules and thereby the inadvertent expression of neoantigens. IL-2 promotes T cell proliferation and can thereby stimulate the clonal expansion of self-reactive T cell clones. The expression of both of these cytokines is elevated in celiac disease (Nilsen et al., 1998).

Taken together, the above observations suggest that TGase 2 is involved in the pathogenesis of celiac disease, but more work is necessary to ascertain whether its role is direct or indirect.

Patients with celiac disease are also prone to other autoimmune diseases including dermatitis herpetiformis (Reunala and Collin, 1997) and type 1 diabetes (Bao et al., 1999). Interestingly, autoantibodies against TGase 2 are also found in the blood of dermatitis herpetiformis (Reunala and Collin, 1997;Dieterich et al., 1999) and type 1 diabetes patients (Bao et al., 1999;Lampasona et al., 1999). Dermatitis herpetiformis is characterized by blistering of the extensor surfaces and a sensitivity to gluten. Thus, the presence of anti-TGase 2 antibodies in celiac disease and dermatitis herpetiformis may reflect a common etiology. In addition, the antibodies in dermatitis herpetiformis may arise in a similar manner to that described above for celiac disease. Consistent with this view is the observation that the anti-TGase 2 antibodies found in dermatitis herpetiformis are mainly of the IgG class. The IgA immunoglobulins are predominantly associated with the external secretions including those of the digestive tract.

The anti-TGase 2 antibodies found in type 1 diabetes belong to the IgG and IgA immunoglobulin classes, which suggests that these antibodies arise by multiple mechanisms. Some diabetics with IgA anti-TGase antibodies also have celiac disease, although the disease is usually asymptomatic (Lampasona et al., 1999). The patients with celiac disease and type 1 diabetes are also usually homozygous for HLA-DQ2 (Bao et al., 1999), and this may be the major factor that drives the production of anti-TGase 2 antibodies. While approximately 8% of diabetics are positive for IgM anti-TGase 2 antibodies, a striking 42% of patients have IgG TGase 2 antibodies (Lampasona et al., 1999). IgG is the major circulating immunoglobulin, which suggests that the IgG anti-TGase 2 is generated by a different mechanism from that of the major IgM anti-TGase 2 found in celiac disease. Lampasona et al. (1999) have proposed the following mechanisms for the generation of the IgG antibodies. First, Type 1 diabetics have increased intestinal permeability (Kuitunen et al., 1994), which may allow immunization against TGase 2 by cells from the systemic and gastric circulation. Second, diabetes is initiated by the destruction of pancreatic b cells, which might release TGase 2 as a neoepitope. This possibility is supported by the observation that successful management of the diabetes, which attenuates b cell destruction, results in decreased anti-TGase 2 titers (Lampasona et al., 1999). Alternatively, based on in vitro data, TGase 2 may cross-link the typical autoantigens for diabetes, such as insulin, glutamate decarboxylase and IA-2 (Bach, 1994), which if occurred in vivo, may then be presented to the appropriate T cells for immunization. Of the autoantigens commonly seen in diabetes, the acetylated B chain of oxidized insulin is a carboxamide donor for TGase 2 (Folk and Finlayson, 1977). Thus, it is further possible that the antigens for the production of IgG anti-TGase 2 antibodies are TGase 2-cross-linked to insulin or another autoantigen. This possibility is also consistent with the suggestion of Molberg et al. (1998b) that TGase 2 acts as a hapten in the generation of antibodies against gliadin.

Given the above observations, we would like to suggest that TGase 2 generates autoantibodies in a variety of autoimmune disorders by cross-linking potential autoantigens and acting as a hapten. This hypothesis is supported by numerous reports showing that the participation of TGase substrates in autoimmune diseases (Table 1). In addition, anti-TGase 2 antibodies have been reported in lupus (Sanchez et al., 2000). TGase 2 has been detected in the synovial fluid of arthritis patients (Weinberg et al., 1991), and the serum and cerebral spinal fluid of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients (Fujita et al., 1998) (Table 1).

Inclusion body myositis

Inclusion body myositis is the most common progressive muscle disorder that affects older individuals. This disease is characterized by a progressively worsening weakness in the proximal and distal limbs that is resistant to steroid therapy (Carpenter, 1996). The histological features of this disease include distinctive rimmed vacuoles and filamentous inclusions, as well as mononuclear infiltrates, which consist predominantly of cytotoxic T cells (CD8 + ) (Miller et al., 1990;Rider et al., 1997). Interestingly, the rimmed vacuoles consist of b-amyloid protein polymers, which in some ways are reminiscent of the cross-linked b-amyloid found in the brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease (Masters et al., 1985;Kim et al., 1999). Askanas et al. (1993) hypothesized that the overexpression of the b-amyloid precursor protein and its abnormal deposition may precipitate the muscle-fiber destruction characteristic of inclusion body myositis. This hypothesis further suggested a role for TGases in inclusion body myositis based of the putative involvement of these enzymes in the formation of the b-amyloid aggregates in Alzheimer's disease (see Section 9 below). Total TGase enzyme activity is elevated by 16-fold in diseased tissue, which is reflected in an increased number of o(g-glutamyl)lysine cross-links to 60/10 000 residues from 2/10 000 in normal muscle (Choi et al., 2000). This activity is ostensibly due to the increased expression of TGase 1 and 2 mRNAs, because the expression of these mRNAs is elevated by 2.5-and 4-fold, respectively, in diseased tissues (Choi et al., 2000). Finally, TGase 1 and 2 co-localize with amyloid deposits in vacuolated muscle fibers from patients with inclusion body myositis (Choi et al., 2000). The chronic inflammation that characterizes inclusion body myositis may also stimulate the expression of TGases 1 and 2 and thereby contribute to the progressive nature of this disease. This myositis is considered to be an autoimmune disease and is associated with the expression of specific HLA molecules and a variety of autoantibodies (Love et al., 1991;Rider et al., 1997;Koffman et al., 1998). In addition, the Th1 to Th2 balance in patients with myositis is shifted in favor of the Th1 cells and results in an excess production of INF-g and TNF-a (Lungderg et al., 1995). These cytokines are also produced by macrophages and the injured muscle cells in the diseased tissue. As described above for celiac disease, INF-g and TNF-a stimulate the expression of TGase 2 (Kim and Steinert, 2001;Kim et al., 2001). Moreover, INF-g and TNF-a stimulate TGase expression in myoblasts (Kim et al., 2001). Thus, myositis may result following the development of autoimmunity. The subsequent production of proinflammatory cytokines may then stimulate the expression of TGases, which in turn polymerize b-amyloid in the affected muscle, causing a progressive pathology.

Cataract formation

A cortical cataract is an opacification of the eye and is a significant cause of blindness. The opacification results from the aberrant cross-linking of predomi-nantly b-crystallin in the outer epithelial layers of the cornea. There are a number of compelling observations that indicate a pivotal role for TGases in the cataract development. Cataracts are distinguished by a marked elevation of intracellular Ca 2 + (Ca 2 + i ). Other ionic disturbances also occur, such as increases in Na + and decreases in K + , but the increase in Ca 2 + i is considered to be the major contributor to cataractogenesis (Sanderson et al., 2000). The elevation of Ca 2 + i may act to stimulate TGase activity either directly or indirectly. It is well established that Ca 2 + activates TGases in vitro (Folk and Finlayson, 1977). Zhang et al. (1998b) have extended this observation by using a unique assay for in situ TGase activity, to show that intracellular TGases are activated by elevations of Ca 2 + i . Lorand et al. (1985Lorand et al. ( , 1998) ) have further shown that treatment of rabbit eye lens with the calcium ionophore ionomycin, promotes the formation of b-crystallin dimers that resemble those produced in vitro with TGase and b-crystallin. These observations suggest that TGases may be activated during cataractogenesis. Nevertheless, to the knowledge of the authors, o(g-glutamyl)lysine crosslinked proteins have not yet been identified in cataracts. The latter would constitute strong evidence in favor for the involvement of TGases in cataract formation.

Calpain is a calcium-dependent protease that proteolytically activates TGase 1 in vivo (Ando et al., 1988;Kim and Bae, 1998;Zhang et al., 1998a). For example, calpain inhibitors prevent the formation of the epidermal cornified cell envelope by blocking the proteolytic processing of TGase 1 (Kim and Bae, 1998). One of the features of cataract formation is a significant loss of lens dry weight and this loss of protein correlates with the ionic disturbance of the lens (Sanderson et al., 2000). Calpain is also thought to be one of the proteases activated during cataractogenesis, because one of its cleavage products, vimentin, has been identified in ionomycin-treated lenses (Lorand et al., 1998;Sanderson et al., 2000). Because TGase 1 is also a substrate for this enzyme, calpain-mediated proteolysis may be another path for the activation of TGase 1. TGase 2, however, loses activity after the calpain activation indicating that the majority of the increase in TGase activation seen following Ca 2 + may be due to TGase 1. This may have important implications for the proteins that are cross-linked, since those proteins normally cross-linked by TGase 2 may be linked to different substrates by TGase 1. These potentially novel aggregates may be pathogenic.

Finally, it is generally agreed that oxidative stress is an important factor in the development of cataract (Boscia et al., 2000). Oxidative stress and reactive oxygen intermediates have been shown to increase the expression of TGase 2 (Mirza et al., 1997), which could enhance phospholipase A2 activity by intra-molecular cross-linking (Cordella-Miele et al., 1993) and thereby stimulating further free radical production via arachidonic acid metabolism (Chan and Fishman, 1980). Oxidative stress may also activate TGases by elevating Ca 2 + i or decreasing cellular GTP levels (Andersson et al., 1998). TGase activity is functionally related to cellular GTP levels (Zhang et al., 1998b). Johnson and coworkers have demonstrated that the induction of an oxidative stress that originates in the mitochondria stimulates in situ TGase activity (Lesort et al., 2000). This stimulation appears to be due to the loss of GTP rather than an increase in Ca 2 + i . However, the major source of reactive oxygen species in the eye is likely to be UV radiation rather than mitochondrial dysfunction. UV radiation generates singlet oxygen and superoxide in the eye (Halliwell and Gutteridge, 1989). Superoxide rapidly dismutates to hydrogen peroxide, which elevates Ca 2 + i (Gibson et al., 2001). Therefore, it is possible that changes in Ca 2 + i observed in the eye are due to long-term UV exposure and that these changes activate TGases. The generation of reactive oxygen species is likely to generate oxidized (and thus denatured) proteins that may have a greater ability to act as substrates for TGases (Groenen et al., 1993).

Atherosclerosis

TGases are involved in the stabilization of the extracellular matrix by cross-linking matrix proteins. TGase 2 is associated with extracellular surfaces, although the mechanism by which this protein traverses plasmalemma membranes is not known (Muesch et al., 1990). A number of the major matrix proteins have been identified as TGase substrates including fibronectin (Tamaki and Aoki, 1981;Mosher et al., 1991), fibrinogen (Chen and Doolittle, 1971;Cottrell et al., 1979;Guadiz et al., 1997), osteonectin (Aeschlimann et al., 1995;Hohenadl et al., 1995), osteopontin (Prince et al., 1991;Sorensen et al., 1994), collagens (Mosher, 1984;Bowness et al., 1987;Kleman et al., 1995;Raghunath et al., 1996), vitronectin (Sane et al., 1988), collagen-tailed acetylcholinesterase (Hand et al., 2000), elafin (Nara et al., 1994) and plasminogen activator inhibitor 2 (Ritchie et al., 2000). Another TGase substrate of interest, which is inserted into the extracellular matrix is latent transforming growth factor b (LTGF-b) (Kojima et al., 1993;Rosenthal et al., 2000). TGF is released from the insoluble LTGF-b and so TGase 2 is important in regulating the availability of this cytokine in the matrix. Thus, TGase 2 is important in the development of the extracellular matrix. Perturbation of its formation has been implicated in a number of pathological conditions including fibrosis and atherosclerosis (Aeschlimann and Thomazy, 2000).

In addition, TGases may contribute to the formation of atherosclerotic plaques by catalyzing the incorporation of lipoprotein(a) [Lp(a)] into these structures. Lp(a) is a subclass of low-density lipoproteins, and increases in Lp(a) are associated with premature atherosclerosis. However, the mechanism of incorporating Lp(a) into the atheromatous plaque is uncertain. Several studies have shown that Lp(a) is a substrate for TGases in vitro and may be cross-linked into insoluble atherosclerotic plaques in vivo (Bowness et al., 1989;Borth et al., 1991;Romanic et al., 1998). In addition, TGase activity is elevated in the inner and middle layers of aortas bearing atherosclerotic lesions of cholesterolfed rabbits (Wiebe et al., 1991). Thus, TGases may contribute to atherosclerosis by cross-linking Lp(a) into plaques.

Alzheimer's disease

Alzheimer's disease is associated with the selective loss of neurons in the neocortex, hippocampus, and amygdala, resulting in an impaired cognitive ability. This disease is also characterized by the presence of two types of protein aggregates: extracellular neuritic senile plaques, and intraneuronal neurofibrillary tangles. TGases are likely to contribute to the formation of these aggregates. Isoforms of TGase co-localize with the plaques and tangles in the brains of Alzheimer's disease patients (Gilad and Varon, 1985;Miller and Anderton, 1986;Appelt et al., 1996;Johnson et al., 1997;Kim et al., 1999;Lesort et al., 1999) and the number of o(g-glutamyl)lysine linkages in insoluble proteins from Alzheimer's disease brains is 30-50 times greater than the number found in normal brain tissues ( 1/10 000 residues) (Kim et al., 1999). In addition, total TGase activity is elevated in the affected areas of Alzheimer's disease brains (Kim et al., 1999;Lesort et al., 1999). This increase in activity is presumably due to the elevated expression of TGase 1 and 2 mRNAs and proteins (Kim et al., 1999). Histochemical studies using TGase isoform-specific antibodies have further demonstrated increased staining for TGase 1 and 2 in the cerebella and cortexes of Alzheimer's disease in comparison to normal individuals (Kim et al., 1999).

In vitro studies have also shown that the components of plaques and tangles are substrates for TGases. For example, b-amyloid (Ab), which is found in a fibrillular form in plaques, is a substrate for TGases. Moreover, cross-linking of Ab by TGase 2 results in the formation of dimers, trimers, tetramers and other high molecular weight oligomers that resemble proteins isolated from the brains of Alzheimer's disease patients (Ikura et al., 1993;Dudek and Johnson, 1994;Ho et al., 1994). The full length Ab peptide contains 2 lysines and 1 glutamine residue. Rasmussen et al. (1994) demonstrated that all three residues are utilized by TGase 2 in the formation of insoluble polymers. In addition to Ab peptide, another amyloid plaque component known as NAC (non-Ab component of amyloid plaque in Alzheimer's disease), which is derived from a synuclein, is also a good substrate for TGases (Jensen et al., 1995). Finally, tau the major component of the paired helical filaments (Lee et al., 1991;Goedert et al., 1992) that make up neurofibrillary tangles (Delacourte and Defossez, 1986;Kosik et al., 1986) is also a substrate for TGase 2 (Dudek and Johnson, 1993;Miller and Johnson, 1995;Appelt et al., 1996;Murthy et al., 1998). Interestingly, the oligomeric products of the TGase and tau reaction are both filamentous and insoluble (Dudek and Johnson, 1993;Appelt and Balin, 1997).

The above observations constitute a strong argument for the participation of TGases in the formation of plaques and tangles in Alzheimer's disease brain. Thus, if plaques and tangles are important in the development of Alzheimer's disease, then the activation of TGases might be a crucial etiological factor in this disease. However, this hypothesis presumes that plaques and tangles contribute to Alzheimer's disease, a notion that is considered controversial. The hypothesis that amyloid contributes to Alzheimer's disease is founded on the observations that the inheritance of mutated amyloid is associated with early onset Alzheimer's disease (Golde et al., 2000) and that Ab, in particular aggregated Ab, is neurotoxic in vitro (Chen et al., 1996). The contrary hypothesis relies on the observation that the amount of amyloid deposits at time of death does not correlate with cognitive ability of either Alzheimer's disease or Down's syndrome patients (Davis et al., 1999;Morris 1999).

Irrespective of the role of plaques or tangles in Alzheimer's disease, TGases may still play a significant role in Alzheimer's disease by cross-linking proteins other than those mentioned above and by participating in apoptosis. In this context, it is important to note that the 30-50-fold increase in o(g-glutamyl)lysine linkages measured in Alzheimer's disease brains was performed on total insoluble proteins extracted from these brains and includes proteins that may not necessarily belong to plaques and tangles. Two potential TGase substrates that might contribute to Alzheimer's disease are glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase and the a-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex. Both of these proteins are inactivated by TGase 2 in the presence of glutamine donors (Cooper et al., 1997a;Gentile et al., 1998). The significance of this observation is that decreases in cerebral metabolism precede the onset of brain atrophy and cognitive impairment at least in part, to a loss of a-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase activity (Gibson et al., 2000). Thus, TGases may contribute to Alzheimer's disease by inactivating a-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase and other enzymes involved in energy metabolism such as glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase. This suggests a role for TGases early and throughout Alzheimer's disease. Furthermore, the conditions that favor TGase activation -inflammation and alterations in cerebral Ca 2 + metabolism -occur in Alzheimer's disease. Lue et al. (1996) have reported that the loss of synapses and dementia correlates with the presence of complement components, eicosanoids and inflammatory cytokines in cerebral amyloid, and other studies have demonstrated that Ca 2 + i stores are perturbed in Alzheimer's disease patients (Peterson and Goldman, 1986;Ito et al., 1994;Gibson et al., 1996). Therefore, TGases could be activated in the formative stages of Alzheimer's disease. The above discussion has centered on the inactivation of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase and a-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase by TGases, but there are a number of other important substrates for these enzymes, such as histones and neurotransmitters, whose removal or inactivation by TGases, could contribute to neurodegenerative disease (Cooper et al., 1997b;Jeitner et al., 2001). Finally, a number of studies have demonstrated that in Alzheimer's disease, the diseased neurons die of apoptosis (Cotman and Anderson, 1995;Lassmann et al., 1995). The activation of TGase 2 in particular has also been associated with the onset of apoptosis (Fesus, 1998;Melino and Piacentini, 1998) although this association remains equivocal (Zhang et al., 1998c).

The preceding arguments favor the hypothesis that TGases may act throughout the development of Alzheimer's disease. In order to test this hypothesis it will be necessary to test for the activation of TGases in individuals with presymptomatic Alzheimer's disease.

Huntington's disease: CAG repeat expansions and transglutaminases

Huntington's disease is characterized by progressive motor and psychiatric disorders, as well as dementia. The most common manifestation of this disease is chorea: involuntary and non-directed motions that disrupt all normal activities eventually leading to death. The clinical progression of Huntington's disease is accompanied by specific neuronal loss and dysfunction, particularly in the striatum and later in the cerebral cortex (Vonsattel and DiFiglia, 1998). Huntington's disease is an autosomal dominant disease and the mutated gene, and its product (huntingtin), have been identified (The Huntington's Disease Collaborative Research Group, 1993). This protein has a molecular mass of 330 kDa but its function remains unknown. Pathological mutations of the huntingtin gene, involving expansion of CAG repeats, result in stretches of polyglutamines of greater than 39 contiguous glutamine residues (from the normal range of 10-25 or so) (Gusella et al., 1993). The age of disease onset correlates inversely with the length of the polyglutamine expansion beyond the normal range (Stine et al., 1993;Brandt et al., 1996). In addition, Huntington's disease patients display anticipation, that is, a decrease in the age of disease onset with succeeding generations. Anticipation results from the propensity of DNA replication to further expand the CAG repeats to a pathological length, particularly during paternal transmission. Thus, succeeding generations of Huntington's disease patients often inherit a successively longer CAG expansion in the huntingtin protein and a correspondingly earlier age of onset. Finally, homozygous patients do not show any marked clinical difference from their heterozygous siblings, which is consistent with the dominant transmission of the disease (Wexler et al., 1987).

The evidence for the involvement of TGases in Huntington's disease is based on the demonstration of elevated TGase activity in the affected regions of diseased brains, and studies showing that huntingtin is a substrate for TGase 2. Huntingtin is found in the aggregates that characterize Huntington's disease (DiFiglia et al., 1997;Becher et al., 1998). Karpuj et al. (1999) and Lesort et al. (1999) have both reported increases in TGase activity in the brains of Huntington's disease patients (see the articles by Steinman and Johnson and their colleagues in this issue for further details). In particular, Karpuj et al. (1999) showed significant elevation in TGase activity in the cortex and cerebellum of Huntington's disease cases. Moreover, TGase activity was increased in the cortical neural extracts of diseased brains. Lesort et al. (1999) were able to show increases in total TGase activity and immunoreactivity for TGase 2 in the striata of Huntington's disease patients relative to the activity measured in healthy brains. This is an important observation because the striatum is the tissue principally affected in this disease. Lesort et al. (1999) also demonstrated that TGase 2 immunoreactivity was elevated in both the medium-sized and large spiny neurons, and was present in the nuclear and cytoplasmic compartments of neurons. Despite these studies, it is not clear which TGase isoform(s) are responsible for increases in activity. Kim et al. (1999) have shown that the mRNAs for TGase 1, 2 and 3 are present in human brains. Recently, we have shown that mRNAs for TGases 1, 2 and 3 are elevated in Huntington's disease patient brains, which suggests that these isoforms may be responsible for the elevations in TGase activity (Kim et al., unpublished observations).

The pathology of Huntington's disease is clearly linked to the polyglutamine expansion in huntingtin. Green (1993) hypothesized that the pathological gain of function conferred by the elongated polyglutamine domain may due to an increased propensity of such a domain to act as a TGase substrate. That is, an increase in contiguous glutamine residues beyond a certain length would favor the polymerization of huntingtin by TGases. Huntingtin polymers have been identified in the affected regions of Huntington's disease brains (Di-Figlia et al., 1997;Becher et al., 1998). Indeed, polyglutamines are excellent substrates for TGase 2 and their ability to act as TGase 2 substrates improves with increasing polyglutamine length (Kahlem et al., 1996;Gentile et al., 1998;Lesort et al., 2000). Moreover, Kahlem et al. (1996) demonstrated that huntingtin containing a pathological length of polyglutamines was a better substrate for TGase 2-mediated polymerization than huntingtin with a shorter, non-pathological glutamine stretch. Karpuj et al. (1999) extended these studies by using huntingtin constructs containing polyglutamine domains to show that TGase-mediated polymerization was not only increased as a function of the glutamine length, but also as a function of the extent to which huntingtin was truncated. The latter observation is interesting because amino-terminal fragments of huntingtin are found in the nuclei of Huntington's disease patients (DiFiglia et al., 1997;Becher et al., 1998). Further, the expression of exon 1 of the huntingtin gene containing an expanded CAG repeat is all that is required to cause Huntington's disease-like symptoms in a mouse model (Mangiarini et al., 1996).

Increasing the polyglutamine length not only increases the number of residues potentially available for TGase-mediated cross-linking, but also increases the apparent affinity of glutamines as TGase substrates, such that more glutamines per length are cross-linked with the longer polyglutamine stretches. This phe-nomenon was demonstrated by Gentile et al. (1998) using spermidine and various lengths of polyglutamine as TGase substrates. Thus, the binding of amine donors to glutamine residues in a particular sequence -such a length of polyglutamines in a truncated huntingtin molecule -may increase the affinity of some of the remaining glutamines as carboxamide donors for TGase and thereby stimulate TGase activity. The importance of these observations is that it provides a plausible mechanism for the involvement of TGases in Huntington's disease and the occurrence of disease only when the number of polyglutamines exceeds 38 residues. The mechanism would rely on an increased affinity of TGase-bonded polyglutamine for subsequent TGase-catalyzed polymerization. This increased affinity would be a function of length of the polyglutamines and the surrounding huntingtin sequences, such that the loss on the sequences other than the polyglutamine stretches would alter the TGase substrate behavior of huntingtin.

In support of the above, protein aggregates are found in the brains of Huntington's disease patients and are thought to be a distinguishing characteristic of the pathology (DiFiglia et al., 1997;Becher et al., 1998). Insoluble aggregates containing huntingtin are found in the cytosol and nuclei of patients (DiFiglia et al., 1997), transgenic animals (Davis et al., 1999), and cellular models of this disease (Saudou et al., 1998;Kim et al., 1999). Moreover, reducing the aggregate formation improved cell viability in an in vitro system (Wellington et al., 2000). Interestingly, the TGase inhibitor cystamine slowed aggregate formation and increased the survival of transgenic mice bearing mutant huntingtin (Karpuj et al., 2000) (see Cooper et al. in this issue, for a discussion of the mechanism by which cystamine inhibits TGase). Nevertheless, as discussed in Section 9, there is some doubt as to whether or not protein aggregates contribute to the pathology of Huntington's disease. For example, the presence of aggregates does not correlate well with the pattern of selective neuronal loss in Huntington's disease (Gutekunst et al., 1999;Kuemmerle et al., 1999). In addition, cell death due to mutant huntingtin in cell models was exacerbated when aggregate formation was retarded (Saudou et al., 1998). These observations suggest that the formation of huntingtin aggregates may not contribute to neuronal death per se and that these aggregate may have a protective role. However, it is still possible that the generation of other TGase-catalyzed polymers may be toxic in Huntington's disease, in the same manner as described earlier for Alzheimer's disease. Given the Gentile et al. (1998) observations concerning the enhanced incorporation of polyamines into polyglutamine domains, these toxic polymers may be cross-linked by polyamines.

One important remaining question concerning the involvement of TGases in Huntington's disease is: does the activation of the enzyme(s) coincide with lesions in the disease? Mutated huntingtin alone does not account for the pathology of Huntington's disease because this protein is expressed throughout the nervous system (Vonsattel and DiFiglia, 1998). There is a reasonable correspondence between the TGase activity and lesion sites (Karpuj et al., 1999;Lesort et al., 1999), but do the conditions for TGase activation correspond with the disease progression? As discussed earlier, TGase activation is stimulated by elevated intracellular calcium, oxidative stress and the release of proinflammatory cytokines. Beal and others (Albin and Greenamyre, 1992;Beal 1994Beal , 1996) ) have proposed that impaired mitochondrial energy production and consequent free radical damage contributes to Huntington's disease pathology, and many studies support this proposal (Goebel et al., 1978;Martin et al., 1992;Browne et al., 1997;Sawa et al., 1999). Some of the more interesting findings have come from the use of a mitochondrial poison 3-nitropropionic acid (3-NP), which irreversibly inhibits succinate dehydrogenase. Chronic administration of 3-NP to animals results in lesions and biochemical changes that are characteristic of Huntington's disease (Brouillet et al., 1992;Beal et al., 1993;Brouillet and Hantraye, 1995). Lesort et al. (2000) have further shown that 3-NP increases the in situ TGase activity of cells overexpressing TGase and that this increase in TGase could be attenuated with thiol antioxidants. These data suggest that mitochondrial-derived free radicals could stimulate TGase activity in the course of Huntington's disease. However, the free radicals may not be working directly to stimulate TGase activity. For example, as noted above, hydrogen peroxide and possibly other radical species mobilize intracellular calcium stores (Gibson et al., personal communication). In addition, protein oxidation and denaturation may increase the ability of the affected protein to act as a TGase substrate (Groenen et al., 1993). Thus, damage to mitochondria during Huntington's disease may result in the production of free radicals from this organelle and the subsequent activation of TGases. How the mitochondria are damaged and how this relates to expression of mutant huntingtin remains to be elucidated.

Another potential source of oxidative stress could be the release of proinflammatory cytokines from glia surrounding the sensitive neurons. As noted earlier, the activity of TGase 2 is stimulated by TNF-a and INF-g (Kim et al., 2001). Unfortunately, the role of inflammation in Huntington's disease has received little attention. Nonetheless, there is evidence of immune dysfunction in this disease. Peripheral lymphocytes from Huntington's disease patients produce greater amounts of IL-2 and INF-g in response to mitogenic stimulation than do healthy controls (Leonardi et al., 1986). In addition, these patients have greater circulat-ing levels of the soluble receptors for IL-2 and TNF-a (Leblhuber et al., 1998;Widner et al., 1999). However, the release of cytokines from microglia and astrocytes of Huntington's disease patients has not been investigated, and would be a pertinent target of future studies. Finally, the expression of huntingtin may influence cytokine release. Metzler et al. (2000) have shown that huntingtin is required for the generation and expansion of hemopoietic cells. The differentiation and proliferation of these cells is tightly regulated by cytokines and suggests that huntingtin may modulate cytokine release. Thus, mutant huntingtin may stimulate cytokine release, which in turn activates TGases.

In addition to Huntington's disease, there are seven other neurodegenerative diseases which feature CAG trinucleotide repeat expansions: spinobulbar muscular atrophy (Kennedy disease) (La Spada et al., 1991), spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) (Orr et al., 1993), SCA2 (Pulst et al., 1996), SCA6 (Zhuchenko et al., 1997), and SCA7 (David et al., 1997), SCA3 (Machado -Joseph disease) (Stevanin et al., 1996), dantatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy (Smith disease) (Tanaka et al., 1996). All of these diseases are inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion, and are characterized by a progressive impairment of coordination and motor neuron degeneration associated with variable mental syndromes (Vonsattel and DiFiglia, 1998). CAG nucleotide repeats are found in the responsible genes for all of these diseases, and initiate pathology when the polyglutamine repeat length is over 35-40 residues in the mutated gene product, except SCA6 (where 21-28 residues is pathological). Finally, a small fraction of schizophrenic patients also bear CAG repeat expansions (Vincent et al., 2000). Thus, it is possible that TGases are involved in these diseases in much the same manner that has been suggested for Huntington's disease.

Parkinson's disease

Parkinson's disease is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder after Alzheimer's disease and is characterized by tremor, bradykinesia, rigidity and postural instability (Riess et al., 1998). These motor disorders result primarily from a loss of dopaminergic neurons of the nigro-striatal pathway. Histologically, Parkinson's disease is characterized by a widespread distribution of Lewy bodies, which are intracytoplasmic aggregates of between 5 and 25 mm in diameter that feature a dense eosinophilic core and pale surrounding halo. Although Lewy bodies are thought to play a causative role in Parkinson's disease, these structures also have been identified in some cases of Alzheimer's disease (Mezey et al., 1998).

The major component of Lewy bodies is a-synuclein (Spillantini et al., 1997) and a-synuclein mutations have been reported for cases of familial Parkinson's disease (Polymeropoulos et al., 1997;Riess et al., 1998). a-Synuclein is a 140 amino acid protein that is homologous to two other gene products, band g-synuclein. However, the functions of these proteins remain largely unknown. Interestingly, a fragment of a-synuclein, known as the non-amyloid component (NAC), has been detected in the Lewy bodies of Parkinson's disease patients (Arima et al., 1998) and the neuritic plaques of Alzheimer's disease patients (Wirths et al., 2000). NAC is particularly interesting because it acts as a substrate for TGases (Jensen et al., 1995), and is neurotoxic to primary dopaminergic neurons (Forloni et al., 2000), as well as to neuroblastoma cells (El-Agnaf et al., 1998). TGases catalyze the formation of NAC polymers and aggregates of NAC and b-amyloid peptides. NAC contains glutamine and lysine residues that act as carboxamide and amine donors, respectively, for TGasemediated o(g-glutamyl)lysine formation, and so allow the formation of NAC polymers. The formation of NAC polymers is important because the aggregated molecule is more toxic than the monomeric form (El-Agnaf et al., 1998;Forloni et al., 2000). Thus, TGases may contribute to the pathology of Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases by catalyzing the formation of toxic NAC aggregates.

Progressive supranuclear palsy

Progressive supranuclear palsy is a motor disorder that initially presents in patients having unexpected falls. The later manifestations of the disease present as postural instability, vertical gaze palsy, axial rigidity, dysarthria and dementia. The most common pathological findings in this disease are midbrain atrophy with dilation of the aqueduct of Sylvius and depigmentation of the substantia nigra. These features are associated with the loss of neurons in the substantia nigra, globus pallidus, subthalamic nucleus, basal ganglia, diencephalon and brain stem (Golbe et al., 1989;Golbe, 1993). Currently, the frequency of progressive palsy is approximately 1-2 per 100 000 (Golbe et al., 1988).

Neurofibrillary tangles occur in the affected areas of progressive supranuclear palsy patients (Golbe, 1993). Similar structures are found in Alzheimer's disease and suggestions that TGases may be responsible for the formation of neurofibrillary tangles in progressive supranuclear palsy have been made based on the following observations. TGase activity is elevated in Alzheimer's diseased brains, and tau -the major component of the tangles -is a TGase substrate (see Section 9). Tau has also been identified as a major component of the detergent-insoluble proteins isolated from the brains of progressive supranuclear palsy patients (Flament et al., 1991). These tau aggregates also contain o(g-glutamyl)lysine cross links (Zemaitaitis et al., 2000a). Moreover, the number of o(g-glutamyl)lysine cross-links is significantly greater in the globus pallidus and pons regions of progressive supranuclear palsy patients than in controls. Co-localization studies further showed that the o(g-glutamyl)lysine cross-links and aggregated tau were coincident (Zemaitaitis et al., 2000a). Recently, the same group was able to show that the messages for TGases 1 and 2 are elevated in both the cerebellum and globus pallidus of patients (Zemaitaitis et al., 2000b). The authors also showed that the mRNAs for TGases 1 and 2 are elevated in both the cerebellum and globus pallidus of progressive supranuclear palsy patients (Zemaitaitis et al., 2000b). In particular, TGase 1 mRNA was highly increased in the cerebellum.

Concluding comments

Our aim in reviewing the role of TGases in disease has been to discern both the general and specific roles that this family of enzymes play in pathology. It is clear that TGases have specific roles in the etiology of the diseases discussed above. Genetic mutations in TGase 1 specifically affect skin barrier function in lamella ichthyosis and X-linked ichthyosis, and factor XIIIa mutations produce bleeding disorders. The inappropriate presentation of TGases and substrates/cross-linked aggregates to the immune system contribute to the autoimmune aspects of celiac and other diseases. Although the activation of TGases appears to be a uniform response in the neurological diseases discussed above, it appears to be restricted to the disease-affected areas. One of the more generalized aspects of TGase activation in the neurological diseases is the contribution of cross linking to the formation of proteinaceous aggregates. Nevertheless, there is some specificity in the composition of the aggregates in these disease states. Tau is a major component of the tangles in Alzheimer's disease whereas huntingtin is the primary constituent of the aggregates in Huntington's disease. Naturally, there is some overlap with respects to the aggregate composition in these diseases. Tau polymers are found in both Alzheimer's disease and progressive supranuclear palsy. However, this may reflect heterogeneity in the pathology of these diseases rather than a lack of specificity in the involvement of TGases.

The following factors determine the extent to which TGases specifically may contribute to a disease: availability of potentially toxic substrates, the mechanism of enzyme activation, and which TGase isoform(s) are activated. The type of substrates that are available for cross-linking will be determined by cell type. Conse-quently, aggregates of crystallin, tau and huntingtin form in cataract, Alzheimer's and Huntington's disease, respectively, because these are the proteins produced by the injured cells. The fact that aggregates form, reflects both the function of the enzyme -polypeptide crosslinking-and the inability of the diseased cells to remove these aggregates. What is not known is whether the various aggregates contribute to the toxicity. Obviously, aggregated crystallin accounts for the opacification in cataract. However, in vitro experiments suggest that polymerized huntingtin may not be neurotoxic. To what extent do these polymers represent the aggregates that form in vivo? The aggregates that form in the course of disease are likely to be composed of other TGase substrates, some of which may be toxic either by their inclusion into the aggregate or their removal from the cellular milieu. Thus, it will be necessary to identify all of the components of the aggregates in order to assess how they participate in pathology.

Proteins may also become better substrates as a result of the disease process. For example, oxidative stress is an important component of cataract formation and Alzheimer's disease. It may be possible that the oxidation of crystallin and tau result in their denaturation and thereby increase their capacity for TGase-catalyzed cross linking.

Clearly, substrate availability alone cannot account for disease specificity. Tau and huntingtin are expressed in both normal and diseased tissues. Similarly, numerous cells along the alimentary track are exposed to gliadin, but the damage in celiac disease is restricted to the upper small intestine. Thus, other factors must contribute to the etiology of disease and to the activation of TGases, in particular, inflammation, oxidative stress and elevations in intracellular calcium. Of these factors, inflammation is especially interesting because in this process TGases can be activated by a number of mechanisms including the release of proinflammatory cytokines and reactive oxygen species. Understanding the means by which TGases are specifically activated in disease will greatly aid in elucidating the role of these enzymes in the disease process.

One of the more interesting observations is that the expression of TGase isoform mRNAs varies among the various diseases, which suggests a certain specificity for the involvement of these enzymes. The mRNAs for TGase 1 and 2 are elevated in inclusion body myositis (Choi et al., 2000), progressive supranuclear palsy (Zemaitaitis et al., 2000b), Alzheimer's (Kim et al., 1999) and Huntington's disease (Kim, Jeitner, Cooper, Blass and Steinert, unpublished observations). TGase 3 message is also elevated in Huntington's disease. Moreover, there is significant variation in the extent to which the isoforms are expressed. Unfortunately, it is not yet known if the mRNAs are being translated into active enzymes. It is important to determine which TGase isoforms are activated in disease because the substrates of these isoforms may include proteins and polyamines critical in the disease process. Elucidation of the role that each TGase isoform performs in disease promises to yield new strategies for treating of these pathologies. In the cases of genetic diseases of TGase 1 and factor XIIIa, gene therapy remains an elusive but necessarily desirable goal. Treatment for those degenerative diseases that result in over expression or aberrant expression of one TGase isoform or another remains an even more difficult challenge. Nevertheless, one plausible approach might be to inhibit the TGase expression by use of isoform-specific inhibitors. While generic TGase inhibitors do exist (e.g. thiol-reactive reagents), they are non-specific and even highly toxic. Therefore, it seems reasonable to these authors that some effort should be devoted to the development of safer and more specific inhibitors. The simple rationale is that diminution of the aberrant TGase activity(ies) might halt the progression of the tissue degeneration and thereby ameliorate the disease symptoms.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to acknowledge Drs A.J.L. Cooper, L. DiGiorio and G. Gibson for their insightful comments on some of the topics covered in this review. T.M.J. was supported by PO1 AG1930 during the preparation of this review.

Table 11Autoantibodies against TGase substrates in autoimmune diseaseTGase

