For personal use. Only reproduce with permission from The Lancet Publishing Group

Responders and non-responders were similar with regard to demographic features, severity of disease at baseline, and HCV loads (table 1). Six patients were positive for SEN D virus either at baseline (two) or during treatment (four); one was positive before and during treatment. Seven patients were positive for SEN H virus: one at baseline, three during treatment, and three after treatment. One patient was infected with both viruses and gave the strongest viral DNA detection results. All six patients positive for SEN D and five of the seven SEN-H-positive patients failed to respond to therapy (table 2). Coinfection with at least one of the two SEN viruses correlated inversely with the effectiveness of treatment with interferon and ribavirin (p=0•025, exact Wilcoxon's test with marginal-likelihood scores based on RNA and alanine aminotransferase concentrations), although the relatively small number of patients necessitates caution regarding generalisability of the results.

Our data indicate that SEN D and SEN H coinfect HCVinfected patients, perhaps reflecting their shared mode of transmission. Coinfection with SEN D might adversely affect the outcome of treatment with interferon and ribavirin. That infection of the liver with more than one virus might render it resistant to antiviral therapy should not be surprising. Indeed, coinfection with hepatitis B and either hepatitis delta virus or HIV predicts an unfavourable outcome of antiviral treatment compared with those infected with only hepatitis B virus. 5 The precise role of SEN viruses in liver diseases remains to be determined. Our data provide initial evidence that they might participate in liver diseases, and should stimulate further research on this new group of viruses.    Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (IBM) is the only disease other than Alzheimer's disease and cerebral amyloid angiopathy in which amyloid ␤-a product of amyloid-␤precursor protein-seems to have a key pathogenetic role. Characteristic light-microscopic features of muscle-biopsy samples from patients with IBM are vacuolated muscle fibres and various degrees of lymphocytic inflammation. 1 Unusual features of IBM vacuolated muscle fibres are intracellular amyloid deposits and the accumulation of a group of proteins that are also present in the brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease, including, in addition to amyloid-␤precursor protein and amyloid ␤, phosphorylated tau in the form of paired-helical filaments, presenilin 1, and apolipoprotein E. 1 Our previous demonstration that experimental overexpression of amyloid-␤-precursor protein in cultured normal muscle fibres induces several characteristics of the IBM phenotype suggested that accumulation of amyloid-␤-precursor protein and amyloid ␤ might be important upstream steps in the IBM pathogenic cascade. 1 Amyloid ␤ is released from amyloid-␤-precursor protein by endoproteolytic cleavage by secretase enzymes, including the newly identified BACE1 and BACE2. 2 BACE1 and BACE2 have been studied at the protein level in brain samples from patients with Alzheimer's disease and controls. 3,4 To investigate the possible role of BACE1 and BACE2 in the processing of amyloid-␤-precursor protein in IBM muscle fibres, we studied the expression of BACE1, BACE2, and amyloid ␤ by immunofluorescence in musclebiopsy samples from ten patients with IBM, three individuals with dermatomyositis, three with polymyositis, two with morphologically non-specific myopathy, two with peripheral neuropathy, one with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and eight healthy individuals. For localisation of BACE1, we used three different antibodies generated against: the whole Nterminus, aminoacids 122-131 of the N-terminus (Affinity Bioreagent, Golden, CO, USA), and total recombinant protein (Biosource, Camarillo, CA, USA). For BACE2, we used antibodies against: the C-terminus (Alpha Diagnostic, San Antonio, TX, USA), and the midregion of the protein (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA). Amyloid ␤ was identified with 6E10 antibody against aminoacid residues 1-17 (Senetek, Maryland Heights, MO, USA). BACE1 and BACE2 were also studied by immunoblots in muscle-biopsy samples from three patients with IBM and three individuals with healthy muscles. Biopsies were done after informed consent was obtained.

We counted vacuolated muscle fibres as a percentage of the total muscle fibres in each biopsy sample at a 10ϫ magnification. Biopsies were taken from the quadriceps femoris (q), or biceps brachialis (b), of ten patients with IBM. The mean percentage of vacuolated muscle fibres was 4•2%: 1) 41, 3•4%, (b); 2) 35, 2•7%, (q); 3) 26, 3•3%, (q); 4) 18, 6%, (b); 5) 25, 2•5%, (q); 6) 32, 9•1%, (b); 7) 34, 3•8%, (q); 8) 28, 2•8%, (q); 9) 25, 5%, (b); and 10) 22, 3•1%, (b). Control muscle biopsies were obtained from three patients with dermatomyositis; 2 (q), 1 (b), three with polymyositis; 2 (b), 1 (q), two with morphologically-nonspecific myopathy; 1 (q), 1 gastrocnemius, two with peripheral neuropathy; 1 (q), 1 (b), one with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; (q) and eight patients with normal muscle; 6 (q), 2 (b). 65•3% (SD 6•3) of vacuolated muscle fibres contained strongly immunoreactive plaque-like inclusions (figure 1) when all three antibodies against BACE1 were used. Similar inclusions (figure 1) were present in 77•0% (SD 11•3) of the vacuolated muscle fibres when incubated with the two antibodies against BACE2. All fibres containing BACE1 and BACE2 immunoreactive inclusions also contained amyloid ␤ immunoreactive inclusions. Within the individual fibres, most of the BACE1 and BACE2 immunoreactive inclusions co-localised with amyloid ␤ immunoreactivity (figure 1). None of the 19 control muscle specimens had inclusions immunopositive for BACE1 or BACE2.

Immmunoblots of all six muscle biopsy samples revealed a band of about 72 kDa, which corresponded to the mature glycosylated form of BACE1 (figure 2). BACE2 migrated as two bands: one at about 60 kDa, corresponding to the mature glycosylated form, and one at about 50 kDa, corresponding to the mature non-glycosylated form (figure 2). Expression of both BACE1 and BACE2 was stronger in IBM muscle than in controls. Whereas both bands of BACE2 were prominently increased in IBM muscle compared with the controls, the intensity of the BACE1 band was only slightly stronger in IBM muscle.

Our data show increased expression of BACE1 and BACE2 in IBM muscle and their co-localisation with amyloid ␤ within IBM vacuolated muscle fibres, suggesting that both of these ␤ secretases are involved in processing of amyloid-␤-precursor protein and amyloid ␤ generation within IBM muscle fibres. In the presence of the overexpressed amyloid-␤-precursor protein shown in IBM muscle fibres, 1 BACE1 might be the main generator of the full-length amyloidogenic amyloid ␤ fragment, whereas BACE2 might be protective by generating benign nonamyloidogenic fragments 5 (unless those fragments have a yet-unidentified toxic effect). BACE1 and BACE2 could be important in the intracellular pathogenesis of IBM and also, perhaps, the intraneuronal formation of neurofibrillary tangles and other intraneuronal disturbances in patients with Alzheimer's disease.

Just as studies of Alzheimer's disease have given leads for studying IBM, the converse might also occur. For example, living human muscle tissue, more readily accessible than human brain tissue, can be cultured (with and without invitro innervation) to relative maturity and has proved its usefulness. 1 With additional studies, including ones involving the BACEs, cultured muscle could further contribute to unravelling the tangled pathogenesis of both IBM and Alzheimer's disease.  method to investigate airway function in infants recently diagnosed with cystic fibrosis, and to test the hypothesis that airway function is diminished shortly after diagnosis, independent of clinically recognised previous lower respiratory tract illness.

We recruited infants, in whom cystic fibrosis was diagnosed by sweat test or genotype, or both, before age 24 months, from five specialist centres in London where neonatal screening is not routinely done (Royal Brompton, Great Ormond Street, King's College, Royal London, and University Hospital Lewisham). We obtained the medical history of patients and details of presentation from the centres from which we recruited the children. The infants' parents confirmed this information when we did tests for lung-function, which included taking a cough swab and reviewing all past microbiological results. If children passed the respiratory physical examination without any difficulty, had negative microbiological cultures, and had never received oral, inhaled, or intravenous antibiotics for respiratory tract symptoms, we classified them as never having had lower respiratory illness. We recruited healthy controls from the local community. We excluded individuals with a history of respiratory illness that resulted in admission to hospital, with congenital abnormalities, who needed assisted ventilation in the neonatal period, or whose gestational age was younger than 36 weeks. The North Thames Multicentre Research ethics committee approved the study, and parents gave informed written consent.

We tested infants when they were healthy. We measured their bodyweight and length, and related them to national growth standards. 4 We assessed exposure to maternal smoking based on parental report and on results of cotinine assays; mothers whose salivary cotinine exceeded 15 g/L were classified as smokers. 5 Measurements of airway function were done with the raised volume technique in sleeping infants sedated with chloral hydrate. 3 We repeated the tests until at least two acceptable and reproducible (within 10%) flowvolume curves were obtained.

We examined associations between FEV 0•4 and MEF 25 and cystic fibrosis with multiple linear regression after adjustment for sex, age, bodyweight, and body length at time of testing, and exposure to maternal smoking. We used normality plots to check that assumptions of normality were met. We estimated that body size, sex, and exposure to maternal The lung function of infants with cystic fibrosis is often reduced shortly after diagnosis. We measured the airway function of newly diagnosed infants to test whether this reduction is independent of clinically recognised lower respiratory illness. We compared the airway function of 33 infants with cystic fibrosis and 87 healthy controls after adjustment for sex, age, bodyweight and length, and exposure to maternal smoking. Airway function was significantly reduced in children with cystic fibrosis, even in those without clinically recognised previous lower respiratory illness. Our findings raise important questions about the onset and natural history of impaired airway function in infants with cystic fibrosis.

Lancet 2001; 358: 1964-65   Respiratory morbidity secondary to chronic inflammation and infection is the leading cause of death in cystic fibrosis. Pulmonary inflammation has been identified in affected infants, 1 but the early evolution of airway pathology remains unclear. 2 In older patients, measurements of forced expiration are used to assess airway function. An adaptation of the raised volume technique has been described for use in infants. 3 This technique permits measurement of forced expiratory volume in 0•4 s (FEV 0•4 ) and maximum expiratory flow at 25% of forced vital capacity (MEF 25 ), which are comparable to measurements obtained in older patients. We used this Numbers are median (range) unless otherwise stated.   

Figure 1 :1Figure 1: Fluorescent immunocytochemistry showing plaquelike BACE1 and BACE2 deposits in vacuolated muscle fibres (A, B), and double-label immunocytochemistry (C, D, E, F) showing co-localisation of BACE1 and BACE2 with amyloid ␤ Original magnification: A, B ‫;0521ן‬ C-F ‫.058ן‬

Figure 2 :2Figure 2: Immunoblots of human muscle homogenates with antibodies against BACE1 and BACE2 Well labelled C represent two different normal muscles. "IBM" wells represent two different IBM muscle biopsy samples.

1964 THE LANCET • Vol 358 • December 8, 2001 Airway function in infants newly diagnosed with cystic fibrosis S C Ranganathan, C Dezateux, A Bush, S B Carr, R A Castle, S Madge, J Price, J Stroobant, A Wade, C Wallis, J Stocks, for the London Collaborative Cystic Fibrosis Group*

FEV†baseline=no smoking.

We thank Ana Casellas and Carol McFarlan for assistance.1 Primi D, Fiordalisi G, Mantero GL, et al. Identification of SENVgenotypes. International publication: WO 00/28039, 2000(international application published under the patent cooperationtreaty).2 Tanaka Y, Primi D, Wang RY, et al. Genomic and molecularevolutionary analysis of a newly identified infectious agent (SEN virus)and its relationship to the TT virus family. J Infect Dis 2001; 183:359-67.3 Umemura T, Yeo AE, Sottini A, et al. SEN virus infection and itsrelationship to transfusion-associated hepatitis. Hepatology 2001; 33:1303-11.4 Susser E, Desvarieux M, Wittkowski KM. Reporting sexual riskbehavior for HIV: a practical risk index and a method for improvingrisk indices. Am J Public Health 1998; 88: 671-74. 5 Torresi J, Locarnini S. Antiviral chemotherapy for the treatment of hepatitis B virus infections. Gastroenterology 2000; 118 (suppl 1): S83-103.

Table 2 :2FeaturesPresence of BACE1 and BACE2 inmuscle fibres of patients withsporadic inclusion-body myositisGaetano Vattemi, W King Engel, Janis McFerrin,Joseph D Buxbaum, Lucia Pastorino, Valerie AskanasSporadic inclusion-body myositis (IBM) is the most common,of SEN-D-infected and SEN-H-infectedprogressive muscle disease of older individuals. Wepatientsinvestigated the presence of BACE1 and BACE2-two ␤secretases that cleave amyloid-␤-precursor protein-in muscle-biopsy samples from patients with IBM and from controls. Onimmunofluorescence, BACE1 and BACE2 co-localised withamyloid ␤ in IBM vacuolated muscle fibres, but were not found in controls. Immunoblotting showed increased BACE2 but not BACE1 in patients with IBM compared with controls. Our study suggests that both of these proteases might participate in processing of amyloid-␤-precursor protein in IBM muscle fibres.Lancet2001; 358: 1962-64   

Table 1 :1Characteristics of infants at time of tests

Table 2 :2Associations of FEV 0•4 and MEF 25 with sex, body length, maternal smoking, and cystic fibrosis using multiple linear regression USC Neuromuscular Center, Department of Neurology, University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Good Samaritan Hospital, Los Angeles, CA, USA (G Vattemi MD, J McFerrin BS, Prof W K Engel MD, Prof V Askanas PhD); and Departments of Psychiatry and Neurobiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA (J D Buxbaum PhD, L Pastorino PhD)Correspondence to: Prof Valerie Askanas, 637 South Lucas Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90017-1912, USA (e-mail: askanas@usc.edu)

