Patterns of muscle involvement in inclusion body myositis: Clinical and magnetic resonance imaging study

The differential patterns of muscle involvement in the upper and lower limbs in sporadic inclusion body myositis (sIBM) were examined in 18 patients using both quantitative and manual muscle testing as well as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in 9 patients. Weakness of the quadriceps femoris and the forearm flexors was present in most patients, but there was considerable variability in the patterns and severity of muscle involvement. MRI disclosed preferential patterns of muscle involvement within functional groups such as the quadriceps femoris, in which there was severe involvement of the vasti with relative sparing of the rectus femoris, and the triceps surae, in which selective involvement of the medial gastrocnemius was common. Involvement of flexor digitorum profundus on MRI was found in only one third of patients. The results emphasize the variability in the clinical phenotype and differential susceptibility of muscles to the disease process in sIBM.

Sporadic inclusion body myositis (sIBM) is the most common chronic myopathy presenting after the age of 50 years and is a prominent cause of progressive muscular weakness and disability in the elderly. 21,24 It is characterized histologically by the presence of rimmed vacuoles, tubulofilamentous inclusions, and amyloid deposits in muscle fibers as well as invasion of muscle fibers by autoaggressive T cells. 7,20 Although sIBM has traditionally been regarded as an inflammatory myopathy, a number of features set it aside from the other varieties of immune-mediated inflammatory myopathy, such as polymyositis and dermatomyositis. Foremost among these are a char-acteristic selectivity of involvement of certain muscle groups in the upper and lower limbs, at least in the earlier stages of the condition, and a poor response to corticosteroids and other forms of immunotherapy, which usually fail to halt the progression of the myopathy. The relationship between the T-cell invasion and other histopathological changes in muscle fibers is not known, and it remains uncertain whether sIBM is primarily an immune-mediated inflammatory myopathy or a degenerative myopathy with an associated inflammatory component. 2,3,13,21 Although it is known that certain muscle groups such as the quadriceps femoris in the lower limbs and the forearm flexor muscles in the upper limbs are often affected in the earlier stages of the disease, 21 and that weakness may be asymmetric in severity, there have been few detailed studies of the patterns of limb muscle involvement using quantitative methods of muscle assessment and muscle imaging in patients with sIBM. 1,16 In the present study, we provide a detailed assessment of the patterns of upper and lower limb muscle involvement in a group of 18 patients with sIBM, using isometric and isokinetic dynamometry as well as manual muscle testing. In addition, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of muscle is used to investigate the selectivity of muscle involvement within different functional muscle groups in the upper and lower limbs.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Patients. All patients diagnosed as having sIBM in the Neuromuscular Clinic at the Australian Neuromuscular Research Institute over a 10-year period from 1989 to 1999 were included in the study after giving informed consent. The patient studies were approved by the Human Rights Committee of the University of Western Australia. In all cases, diagnosis of IBM was based on the following clinical and laboratory criteria as outlined by Griggs et al. 14 : a slowly progressive myopathy of over 6-month duration; onset after the age of 30 years; involvement of both proximal and distal limb muscles; serum creatine kinase (CK) level <12 times normal; electromyographic findings compatible with an inflammatory myopathy (including fibrillation potentials and polyphasic motor unit potentials of short, long, or mixed duration); muscle biopsy (vastus lateralis 16 cases, deltoid 2 cases) features of an inflammatory myopathy with mononuclear cell invasion of nonnecrotic muscle fibers, the presence of rimmed vacuoles, and nuclear and/or cytoplasmic 15-18-nm tubulofilamentous inclusions in muscle fibers by electron microscopy.

Muscle Assessment. Manual muscle testing of proximal and distal upper and lower limb and neck muscles using a 10-point modified Medical Research Council (MRC) grading scale 18,19 was performed in all patients. In addition, in all patients isometric muscle strength was measured for the shoulder abductor and external rotator, elbow flexor and extensor, wrist extensor, and hip flexor and abductor muscle groups on each side, and in the neck flexor muscles by the same examiner (B.A.P.) using a handheld myometer (Penny & Giles, Dorset, UK). Grip strength was measured using a modified sphygmomanometer cuff. In eight patients (see Table 1), isometric and isokinetic torque of the knee flexor and extensor muscle groups was measured by computerized dynamometry using a Kin-Com dynamometer (Chattecx Corp., Hixson, TN). Percentage weakness was calculated for each of the aforementioned muscle groups using gender-and age-matched data from 200 normal subjects. 22,23 Muscle assessment was repeated every 3-6 months as part of the patient's routine medical management. For nine of the patients who were included in the prospective MRI study, a muscle assessment was performed within 1 month of the scan. For the remaining nine patients, the most recent muscle assessment was used for analysis.

Muscle MRI. Transverse scans were performed in nine of the patients (see Table 1) using a 1.5-Tesla Siemens scanner (Magnetom Vision MRI Scanner, QEII Medical Centre, Perth, Australia). Bilateral scans were obtained for the thigh and calf in all nine patients and for the forearm in five patients, and unilateral scans of the forearm and upper arm were performed in three patients. A package of seven slices was acquired with the fourth slice centered over the junction of the upper third and lower two thirds of each of the limb segments. A 16-echo spinecho sequence was used (TR = 4 s, TE from 22.5 to 360 ms, acquisition time 17 min 5 s, 256 × 256 matrix) from which T2 relaxation time mapping was performed. The proton-density weighted image from the second echo was used as a reference image from which an outline of individual muscles was obtained. In nine normal subjects with a mean age of 52.7 years (range 22-74 years) the mean T2 relaxation times were 66 ± 6 ms (range 58-89 ms) for muscles in the forearm, 78 ± 6 ms (range 68-96 ms) in the thigh, and 75 ± 5 ms (range 61-86 ms) in the calf. The upper limit of normal T2 relaxation time for each muscle was calculated using 3 SD above the mean, the range of the upper limit of normal being 68-91 ms in the forearm muscles, 86-100 ms in the thigh muscles, and 86-91 ms in the calf muscles. The upper limit of normal calculated for each muscle was used for comparison with the patient data.

RESULTS

Patients. There were 12 men with a mean age of 70 years (45-90 years) and 6 women with a mean age of 60 years (53-66 years). Details of individual patients are given in Table 1. There was an older mean age of onset in the male patients (70.7 years, range 32-83 years) than in the female patients (60.7 years, range 37-67 years). The mean time to diagnosis was 4.3 years (range 1-9 years) and the mean duration of disease 9.4 years (range 2-20 years). The maximum serum CK levels recorded in individual patients ranged from 89 to 910 U/L (normal <200 U/L).

Distribution of Muscle Weakness. Considerable variability in the distribution and severity of muscle involvement was found in different patients (Fig. 1).

The muscle groups most consistently and severely affected at the time of presentation were the quadriceps femoris, which were weak and atrophied in all but one patient (case 15), with the mean percentage weakness (±SD) being 65 ± 33% (range 0-100%). Atrophy was first apparent in the vastus medialis and subsequently in the vastus lateralis, with relative preservation of the rectus femoris in some of the earlier cases. In case 15, the initial presentation was weakness of the hands, and the quadriceps muscles were normal both on manual muscle testing and isometric testing, as were the other lower limb muscle groups. The hip flexors were also affected to a lesser degree in 13 of the 18 patients, with the mean percentage weakness (±SD) being 25 ± 26% (range 0-82%). The hip abductors were normal in strength in 11 patients and severely affected in only one. The hip adductors and extensors were of normal strength or only mildly affected (MRC grade 4+ to 5) in all patients tested. The pattern of weakness of the muscles of the lower leg was also variable. In general, the anterior tibial and triceps surae muscles were of normal strength or only mildly affected (MRC grade 4+ to 5). More severe weakness of the anterior tibial muscles (MRC grade 1+ to 3+) was present in four of the more advanced cases. Asymmetric severity of involvement, defined as an interside difference of greater than 10% in isometric or isokinetic torque, or of one or more MRC grades, was found in one or more muscle groups in 10 of the 18 patients and was most frequent in the knee extensors.

As in the lower limbs, the pattern of muscle involvement in the upper limbs varied in different patients. In the majority of patients, particularly in those with disease of longer duration, there was a distal emphasis with weakness and atrophy of the long finger and wrist flexors and extensors, with the flexor digitorum profundus being involved at an earlier stage and usually being more severely affected than the flexor digitorum sublimis. In a minority of cases there was severe involvement of proximal muscles (e.g., cases 3 and 6) or a more uniform pattern of involvement of proximal and distal muscle groups (e.g., case 13). The mean percentage weakness (±SD) was 14 ± 21%, 25 ± 29%, and 26 ± 27% for the shoulder, elbow, and wrist/finger muscle groups, respectively. Interside asymmetry of involvement was commonly found in both proximal and distal muscle groups (Fig. 1).

Weakness of the neck flexor muscles was present in 9 of the 18 patients, being more severe in cases of longer standing, whereas the neck extensors were normal or only mildly affected in all cases.

Muscle MRI Findings. Recognition of muscle involvement was based on qualitative abnormalities, which were visible on the proton-density reference images (Figs. 2-4), and quantitative abnormalities on T2 relaxation times (Fig. 5). The quadriceps femoris was the most severely affected muscle group, both on the proton-density images and T2 relaxation times, in seven of the nine patients scanned, whereas the thigh adductors and posterior thigh muscles were normal in eight of the nine patients. Differential involvement of the subcomponents of the quadriceps femoris was found in a number of cases. All three of the vasti were usually affected, at times asymmetrically (Fig. 2A), whereas the rectus femoris was normal for both proton-density images and T2 values in five of the nine patients (Fig. 2). In the lower leg, the most frequent finding, in seven of the nine patients, was involvement of the medial head of gastrocnemius, which was affected according to both proton-density images and T2 values (Fig. 3). The lateral head of gastrocnemius showed changes on the proton-density images in only three patients and on T2 values in four, whereas the soleus was abnormal in three patients (cases 1, 6, and 11). The anterior tibial and peroneal muscles were also less affected, in four of the nine cases (Fig. 3C), with the pattern of involvement of individual muscles being different in each case. The pattern of muscle involvement was also variable in the upper limb. Most frequently affected was the flexor digitorum profundus in seven cases (Fig. 4B,C), whereas the flexor digitorum sublimis, flexor carpi ulnaris and radialis, and extensor carpi ulnaris were affected in only four of the nine cases. Selective involvement of the flexor digitorum profundus with no involvement of the flexor digitorum sublimis was found in only three cases. In one of the longer stand-ing cases (case 1) there was also involvement of the extensor carpi radialis longus, brachioradialis, pronator teres, and supinator, and, in case 15, the wrist and finger extensors and brachioradialis were all affected (Fig. 4C). Scans through the upper arm were obtained in only three cases (cases 1, 8, and 16) and showed variable patterns of involvement of the biceps and brachialis in case 1 and of the triceps in case 16. Asymmetric involvement of upper limb muscles was again a frequent finding.

Correlation between Clinical and MRI Findings.

There was a good correlation between clinically detected weakness and alteration on proton-density images and mean T2 relaxation time in the quadriceps femoris and hamstring muscles in eight of the nine patients who had MRI scans. On the other hand, in four cases, some muscles, such as the finger extensors and flexors (Fig. 4A) and the anterior tibial muscles (Fig. 3B), did not demonstrate MRI changes even when weakness was present on clinical testing. Conversely, all muscles with MRI changes had clinically detected weakness.

DISCUSSION

Previous reports have drawn attention to the characteristic involvement of the quadriceps femoris and forearm muscles in sIBM and to the variable phenotype in different patients with the condition. 5,16,17 However, there have been no detailed studies of the patterns of involvement of limb muscle groups using quantitative methods of muscle assessment and muscle imaging. The combined use of quantitative muscle testing and MRI scanning in the present study has allowed a more complete assessment of the patterns of muscle involvement in the upper and lower limbs in a group of patients with histologically confirmed sIBM and of the variability in the clinical phenotype in patients with this condition. Our findings indicate that, although in most cases the quadriceps femoris muscles in the lower limbs and the long finger flexors in the upper limbs are affected earliest and most severely as the disease progresses, the extent to which these muscle groups are affected varies considerably in different patients. Moreover, this characteristic pattern of muscle involvement is not always present and, in some patients, there is progressive weakness of upper limb muscles with complete sparing of the quadriceps and other lower limb muscle groups; in another subgroup of patients there is a more proximal predominance of weakness in both the upper and lower limbs, as has been noted in some previous clinical reports. 5,16,17 It has been reported previously that forearm weakness in patients with sIBM may be asymmetric and may be more severe in the nondominant upper limb. 10 The present findings, both with quantitative muscle testing and MRI, confirm that asymmetric involvement is common in many muscle groups in both the upper and lower limbs. The degree of asymmetry is variable, being detectable only on quantitative muscle testing in some cases, whereas in others it is more marked, resulting in interside differences of one or more MRC grades in some muscle groups.

On the basis of our observations there does not appear to be any greater propensity for the muscles of the dominant or nondominant side to be more severely affected.

There have been few previous reports of muscle MRI findings in groups of patients with sIBM. Fraser et al. 12 reported signal changes on T1-and T2weighted images and a fat-suppressive short tau inversion recovery (STIR) sequence in a mixed group of patients with polymyositis, dermatomyositis, and IBM. They found changes predominantly in the anterior compartment of the thigh in IBM, but did not present quantitative data on T2 relaxation times. Reimers et al. 25 also studied a mixed group of patients with IBM and other inflammatory myopathies and presented only semiquantitative data on changes in signal intensity on T2-weighted images.

Sekul and Dalakas 26 presented nonquantitative observations on T1-and STIR-weighted images of the forearm muscles in a group of patients with sIBM and emphasized the involvement of the flexor digitorum profundus and relative sparing of the flexor digitorum sublimis.

In the present study we have undertaken a more detailed assessment of MRI changes in muscles of the thigh, lower leg, forearm, and upper arm based on both qualitative detection of signal change on proton-density images and quantitative T2 relaxation time mapping. In general, a good correlation was found between the qualitative and quantitative approaches in muscles that were weak clinically, but the T2 relaxation times were more sensitive, at times being abnormal, even in muscles without any visible change on the proton-density images. Our findings also indicate that, although there is generally a good correlation between MRI changes and clinical weakness in some muscle groups, such as the knee extensors and flexors, in others, such as the finger flexors and extensors and the anterior tibial muscles, quantitative muscle testing is more sensitive and may demonstrate weakness of muscles that are normal on MRI. It is possible that clinically weak muscles that appear normal on MRI may not yet have undergone sufficient pathological change to produce an MRI signal change on quantitative T2 relaxation time mapping. In the present study, T2 relaxation times in a number of the clinically weak muscles were very close to the upper limit of the normal range, and it FIGURE 3. Proton-density weighted images at the level of the junction of the upper one third and lower two thirds of both lower legs. (A) Case 8: involvement of the medial head of gastrocnemius on both sides with normal signal in all other muscles; (B) case 10: asymmetric involvement of the medial head of gastrocnemius; (C) case 5: involvement of the medial head of gastrocnemius on both sides and tibialis anterior and the lateral head of gastrocnemius on the left.

is probable that if a larger group of age-matched normal subjects had been used for comparison, these muscles would be shown to be abnormal on MRI as well as clinically.

Of particular interest in the present study was the finding with MRI of preferential patterns of involvement within certain functional muscle groups, such as the quadriceps femoris, triceps surae, and finger flexors. In the thigh, the characteristic finding was of preferential involvement of the vasti with sparing of the rectus femoris until the late stages of the disease, whereas in the calf the medial head of the gastrocnemius was preferentially affected. In the forearm, the previously reported finding of preferential involvement of the flexor digitorum profundus with sparing of the flexor digitorum sublimis was confirmed even in some cases of long standing, but was present in only a third of the cases scanned. The finding of differential involvement of the flexor digitorum profundus is therefore suggestive of sIBM, but its absence does not exclude the diagnosis. Selective sparing of the rectus femoris with involvement of the vasti and selective involvement of the medial head of the gastrocnemius have also been reported in some cases of myotonic dystrophy 4,8,27 and Becker dystrophy, 9 and are therefore not specific to sIBM. However, in both myotonic dystrophy and Becker dystro-phy, there is usually also involvement of other muscles, such as the posterior thigh muscles, adductors, and other calf muscles not usually affected in sIBM. On the basis of our observations, we therefore suggest that the finding of selective involvement of the medial gastrocnemius and of the vasti with sparing of rectus femoris is typical of sIBM and, when combined with a pattern of selective involvement of flexor digitorum profundus with sparing of flexor digitorum sublimis, is highly suggestive of this condition. MRI may therefore be of diagnostic value in the investigation of patients with suspected sIBM, especially in individuals in whom the muscle biopsy findings are inconclusive or in whom a biopsy is not possible.

The present findings indicate that some muscles are more susceptible than others to the disease process in sIBM. As yet, the basis for this differential susceptibility remains unknown. Possible factors involved may include differences in the size, physiological roles, and functional reserve of different muscles as a result of which weakness and signal changes related to muscle fiber loss and fat replacement may be manifest at an earlier stage in some muscles than others. It is known that there are differences in fiber type proportions 15 and in perfusion patterns during exercise 11 in subcomponents of lower limb muscles groups, such as the quadriceps femoris and triceps surae, which presumably reflect differences in their functional roles. 6 In the thigh, the proportion of tonic type I fibers is higher in the vasti than the rectus femoris, and in the calf the medial gastrocnemius also has a higher proportion of type I fibers. 15 However, this is unlikely to account for the greater involvement of these muscles, because the soleus, which has an even higher proportion of tonic motor units, 15 is much less affected. It has been suggested that oxidative stress and the accumulation of mtDNA deletions with aging may be involved in the pathogenesis of muscle fiber degeneration in IBM. 3,21 It is conceivable that levels of oxidative stress and mtDNA deletions are greater in some muscles than in others, and that this may determine the rate at which the degenerative process evolves in different muscles. As yet, there are no data on such differences in normal muscles with aging. An alternative possibility, for which there is as yet no direct evidence, but which also warrants further investigation, is that susceptibility is related to the differential expression of genes involved in the control of the regional development and lifespan of muscle fibers in different muscles. 

The authors are grateful to Professor B. A. Kakulas and Dr. V. Fabian who performed the diagnostic histopathological examinations; to I. Morris for his helpful advice; and to the patients and control subjects who participated in the study. Financial support for the study was provided by the Neuromuscular Foundation of Western Australia.

FIGURE 1 .1FIGURE 1. The proportion (%) of muscle groups (n = 18 for each side) that were clinically weak as determined using quantitative or manual muscle strength testing. (A) Upper limb. (B) Lower limb.

FIGURE 2 .2FIGURE 2. Proton-density weighted images at the level of the junction of the upper one third and lower two thirds of both thighs. (A) Case 8: asymmetric involvement of the vasti and normal signal in both rectus femoris muscles; (B) case 16: severe involvement of the vasti and rectus femoris muscles; (C) case 15: normal signal in all muscles.

FIGURE 4 .4FIGURE 4. Proton-density weighted images at the level of the junction of the upper one third and lower two thirds of the forearm. (A) Case 8: normal signal in all muscle groups; (B) case 16: severe involvement of flexor digitorum profundus, flexor carpi ulnaris, and extensor carpi ulnaris; (C) case 15: involvement of the flexor digitorum profundus, extensor digitorum, extensor carpi radialis, and brachioradialis muscles.

FIGURE 5 .5FIGURE 5. T2 relaxation times in patients with sIBM. The solid horizontal lines indicate the mean T2 relaxation time for each muscle in patients; the shaded bars indicate the upper limit of normal T2 relaxation times. (A) Thigh (n = 18): VL, vastus lateralis; VM, vastus medialis; VI, vastus intermedius; RF, rectus femoris; AM, adductor magnus; HM, hamstrings. For the hamstrings, the T2 relaxation times for biceps femoris, semitendinosus, and semimembranosus were averaged. (B) Lower leg (n = 18): TA, tibialis anterior; PL, peroneus longus; MG, medial gastrocnemius; LG, lateral gastrocnemius. SO, soleus. (C) Forearm (n = 13): FDP, flexor digitorum profundus; FDS, flexor digitorum sublimis; ED, extensor digitorum communis; ECRL, extensor carpi radialis longus.

Table 1 .1Summary of patient details.AgeAge at onsetInterval toDisease durationSerum creatine kinaseCaseGender(years)(years)diagnosis (years)(years)level (U/L)*1  ‡F53377178692  † ‡F5551445633F585227894F64534115085  † ‡F6556497476  ‡F6661151567M45326133228  † ‡M6256564669  †M65591691010  † ‡M64556973811  † ‡M67662274812M68653338213M685161880814M75694683015  † ‡M79724849216  ‡M8061920NA17M806271837218  †M908337402*Maximum serum creatine kinase level recorded (normal <200 U/L). † Cases tested with computerized dynamometry for knee extensors and flexors. ‡ Cases having undergone magnetic resonance imaging. NA, data not available.

