Three lipoprotein receptors and cholesterol in inclusion-body myositis muscle

Background: An important aspect of inclusion-body myositis (IBM) vacuolated muscle fibers (VMF) is abnormal accumulation of amyloid-␤ precursor protein (A␤PP) epitopes and its product, amyloid-␤ (A␤), and of phosphorylated tau (p-tau) in the form of paired helical filaments. Lipoprotein receptors and cholesterol are known to play an important role in A␤PP processing, A␤ production, and tau phosphorylation. Methods: In 10 IBM and 22 control muscle biopsies the authors immunolocalized low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR), very low-density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR), and low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP), and colocalized them with A␤, p-tau, APOE, and free cholesterol. Results: In each biopsy, virtually all IBM VMF had strong LDLR-immunoreactive inclusions, which colocalized with A␤, APOE, p-tau, and free cholesterol. VLDLR was increased mainly diffusely, but in approximately 50% of the VMF it was also accumulated in the form of inclusions colocalizing with A␤, APOE, and free cholesterol, but not with p-tau. LRP inclusions were present in a few VMF. In all myopathies, a subset of regenerating and necrotizing muscle fibers had prominent diffuse accumulation of both LDLR and free cholesterol. At normal neuromuscular junctions (NMJ) postsynaptically, LDLR and VLDLR, but not LRP, were immunoreactive. Conclusions: 1) Abnormal accumulation of LDLR, VLDLR, LRP, and cholesterol within IBM vacuolated muscle fibers suggests novel roles for them in the IBM pathogenesis. 2) Expression of LDLR and VLDLR at normal NMJ suggests physiologic roles for them in transsynaptic signaling pathways, increased internalization of lipoproteins there, or both. 3) Increased LDLR and free cholesterol in some regenerating and necrotizing muscle fibers suggest a role for them in human muscle fiber growth and repair and necrotic death.

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (IBM), the most common degenerative muscle disease of patients 50 years and older, is of unknown etiology and pathogenesis. 1 Features of the IBM muscle biopsy include: 1) vacuolated muscle fibers (VMFs) containing congophilic amyloid composed of either collections of 6-to 10-nm filaments containing A␤ or clusters (tangles) of 15-to 21-nm paired helical filaments (PHF) containing phosphorylated tau (ptau); and 2) various degrees of mononuclear cell inflammation. 1 The IBM muscle pathologic phenotype has many similarities to that of AD brain 1 for example, collections of A␤ 2 and PHFs, 3 and accumulations of amyloid-␤ precursor protein (A␤ PP), APOE, 4 and several other "Alzheimercharacteristic" proteins, 1 including ones related to oxidative stress. 1,5 In IBM, 1 as in AD, 5,6 abnormal signal transduction, perturbed by oxidative stress and aging, was proposed to play an important pathogenic role. However, mechanisms leading to accumulation of various proteins are not understood in either disease.

The low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) gene superfamily encompasses several cell-surface transmembrane receptors, including LDLR, very lowdensity lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR), and low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP). 7,8 The best known function of the LDLR family is binding and delivery of lipoproteins into the cells. 7,8 Some of those receptors, such as VLDLR and LRP, also participate in intracellular and extracellular signal transduction. 9 The LDLR family members bind and internalize APOE. 7 Although the APOE-⑀4 allele is not a predisposing factor of IBM, 10 APOE is prominently accumulated in IBM abnormal muscle fibers (the individual alleles of APOE cannot yet be distinguished by immunocytochemistry). 4 To evaluate whether LDLR family members and cellular free cholesterol participate in the IBM pathogenesis, in IBM muscle biopsies we immunolocalized LDLR, VLDLR, and LRP, and studied their spatial relationship to accumulated APOE, A␤, p-tau, and free cholesterol.

Materials and methods. Muscle biopsies.

Immunocytochemical studies were performed on transverse sections of diagnostic muscle biopsies obtained from 32 patients with IBM (10), dermatomyositis (4), polymyositis (2), morphologically nonspecific myopathy (3), non-IBM vacuolar myopathy (1), mitochondrial myopathy (2), ALS (3), chronic peripheral neuropathy (3), and normal muscle (4). Diagnoses were based on clinical and laboratory investigations, including 18-reaction histochemistry of the muscle biopsy. 11 The number of vacuolated muscle fibers in each IBM biopsy was 41, 35, 26, 25, 32, 34, 28, 14, 34, and 32.  Light microscopic immunocytochemistry. Immunocytochemistry was performed on 10-m-thick sections of fresh-frozen biopsies. Peroxidase-antiperoxidase and immunofluorescence procedures were performed as described. [2][3][4] Sections were incubated in primary antibodies for 12 to 36 hours at 4 °C. LDLR family members were immunolocalized using well-characterized antibodies against: 1) LDLR: a) chicken polyclonal (Maine Biotechnology Services, Portland, ME), IgY 4 g/mL, and b) mouse monoclonal C7, 12 a relatively low affinity antibody (D. Strickland, personal communication, 2000), IgG1 at concentration 10 -15 g/mL, each antibody recognizing different epitopes of the extracellular domain of the human LDLR 12 and data provided by the company; 2) VLDLR: rabbit polyclonal R2623 13 recognizing the C-terminal (intracellular) domain of the human VLDLR, 13 IgG 3 g/mL; 3) LRP: a) rabbit polyclonal 2629 (D. Strickland, unpublished observations, 2000) against the ␣-chain of human LRP, IgG 10 g/mL, and b) mouse monoclonal 5A6 14 (Research Diagnostics, Flanders, NJ) against the ␤-chain of human LRP, 14 IgG1 6 g/mL.

Double immunofluorescence used antibodies against LDLR or VLDLR, combined with one of the following: 1) mouse monoclonal 6E10 15 anti-A␤ (Senetec PLC, Napa, CA), IgG1 3 g/mL; 2) mouse monoclonal SMI-31 16 (Sternberger Monoclonals, Lutherville, MD), recognizing phosphorylated tau on IBM-PHF, 3 IgG1 1.5 g/mL; 3) rabbit polyclonal GHE3-14 17 anti-APOE, IgG 3 g/mL (with LDLR only; VLDLR was colocalized with APOE on adjacent sections); 4) mouse monoclonal anti-desmin (Zymed Laboratories, South San Francisco, CA), which identifies regenerating (positive) and necrotizing (negative) muscle fibers, 4 IgG1 diluted 1:50 (protein concentration not available from the company). Neuromuscular junctions (NMJ) were identified using ␣-bungarotoxin (␣-BT) conjugated to Alexa 488 (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR), which binds to the postsynaptic nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. 4 To block nonspecific binding of antibody to Fc receptors, the sections were preincubated with normal goat or rabbit serum diluted 1:10. Omission of the primary antibody or its replacement with species-specific nonimmune serum or irrelevant antibody were used to control for specificity as described. [2][3][4] Visualizing free cholesterol. We utilized filipin, a fluorescent polyene antibiotic, which binds specifically to free (unesterified) cholesterol. [18][19][20][21][22] Filipin staining was performed on 5 IBM and 12 control muscle biopsies (2 ALS, 3 peripheral neuropathies, 2 polymyositis, 1 mitochondrial myopathy, 1 periodic paralysis, 1 morphologically nonspecific myopathy, and 2 dermatomyositis). Median age was 60 years for IBM patients and 61 years for control subjects. Median total serum cholesterol levels were 214 mg/dL for IBM patients and 220 mg/dL for control subjects. One IBM patient who previously had hypercholesterolemia was taking pravastatin; his current cholesterol is 214 mg/dL. The staining was performed essentially as described by others, 19,21 with minor modifications. Briefly, a stock solution containing 2.5 mg/mL filipin complex (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) was prepared in dimethyl sulfoxide and stored in the dark at Ϫ20 °C. Unfixed or paraformaldehyde-fixed sections of fresh-frozen muscle biopsies were incubated with filipin diluted 1:75 in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. Subsequently, sections were rinsed in PBS, mounted in glycerol-PBS, and examined under the Zeiss Axiophot fluorescence microscope using a G-365 exciter filter and LP-420 barrier filter (Carl Zeiss, Germany). In double-labeled fluorescence experiments, sections were first immunostained for LDLR, VLDLR, A␤, p-tau, or desmin, and then were processed for filipin staining. Control procedures included prefixation with paraformaldehyde [19][20][21][22] and extraction of free cholesterol from the sections with acetone 20 for 1 hour at room temperature before filipin staining.

Immuno-electron microscopy. On 10-m unfixed frozen sections adhered to the bottom of 35-mm Petri dishes, [2][3][4] LDLR was immunolocalized with either HRP-or 5-nm gold-conjugated secondary antibody, or was coimmunolocalized with APOE using two different species-specific secondary antibodies conjugated respectively to 10-nm and 5-nm gold particles. VLDLR was immunolocalized using a secondary antibody conjugated to 10-nm gold particles. For all immuno-electron microscopy, after incubation with a primary antibody (or with a mixture of two primary antibodies), followed by secondary antibodies, the sections were fixed in a 2% paraformaldehyde 1.25% glutaraldehyde mixture, postfixed in 1% osmium tetroxide, and embedded in Epon in situ in the Petri dish, as described. [2][3][4] 

Figure 1. Light microscopic immunocytochemistry of IBM vacuolated muscle fibers using PAP reaction. (A) Lowdensity lipoprotein receptor (LDLR). (B) Very low-density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR). (C) Low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP)

. With all three antibodies there are strongly immunoreactive inclusions within abnormal muscle fibers. Original magnification ϫ1,250 (A through C).

In immunogold procedures, LDLR-and VLDLR-immunopositive fibers were light microscopically identified on peroxidase-antiperoxiodase-stained adjacent sections. The embedded sections in the dish were viewed under phasecontrast microscopy, and the previously identified muscle fibers were marked, drilled out, and processed for electron microscopic studies, as described. [2][3][4] Results. IBM. Light microscopic immunocytochemistry. The following were observed in all IBM biopsies: 1. LDLR: virtually all of the VMF had strong, mainly plaque-like and occasionally squiggly, LDLRimmunoreactive (IR) inclusions (figure 1A); in approximately 10% of the fibers, LDLR-IR also was increased at the fiber-periphery, or diffusely in the cytoplasm, or

Figure 2. Double-labeled fluorescence immunocytochemistry and cytochemistry of IBM abnormal muscle fibers. (A through H) Colocalization of low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) (A, C, E, and G) with amyloid-␤ (A␤) (B), APOE (D), SMI-31 (F), and Filipin (H). Low-density lipoprotein-immunoreactive inclusions closely colocalize with A␤, APOE, and filipin. However, they are more numerous than SMI-31-immunopositive inclusions, which identify clusters of paired helical filaments. One prominent plaque-like LDLR-immunoreactive inclusion is identified (E, arrow). (I through L) Close colocalization of very low-density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR)-immunoreactive inclusions (I and K) with A␤ (J) and filipin (L). (M through P) A␤ (M) and SMI-31 (O) immunoreactive inclusions closely colocalize with filipin (N and P) inclusions. Original magnification ϫ800 (A through D, I through L), ϫ1,900 (E through H, M through P).

both (figure 2, E and G). The two different antibodies against LDLR produced the same results.

2. VLDLR: virtually all of the vacuolated muscle fibers had diffusely increased VLDLR-IR, and approximately 50% of them also had plaque-like inclusions (see figures 1B and 2, I and K).

3. LRP: immunoreactivity, in the form of either moderately or strongly immunoreactive inclusions or diffuse cytoplasmic reactivity, was present only in approximately 5 to 10% of VMF (see figure 1C).

By double immunofluorescence, LDLR-IR inclusions colocalized with A␤, APOE, and SMI-31-IR (indicating phosphorylated tau on PHF) in virtually all of the IBM vacuolated muscle fibers (see figure 2, A through F). In some fibers, LDLR-IR inclusions were more numerous than SMI-31-IR inclusions (see figure 2, E and F). VLDLR immunoreactivity colocalized, by double immunofluorescence and on adjacent sections, respectively, with A␤ (see figure 2, I and J) and APOE-IR (not shown), but not with SMI-31 (i.e., not with PHF).

Filipin histochemistry. Virtually all IBM vacuolated muscle fibers containing LDLR and VLDLR immunoreac-tivity had increased cytoplasmic accumulation of filipin positivity indicating free cholesterol. In those fibers, free cholesterol was in inclusions that colocalized with LDLRand VLDLR-immunoreactive inclusions, and in addition was often diffusely increased (see figure 2, G, H, K, and L). Free cholesterol-containing inclusions also colocalized with A␤-and SMI-31-IR inclusions (see figure 2, M through P). Prefixation with paraformaldehyde did not influence the filipin staining, whereas prior extraction with acetone prevented it, as previously reported. [19][20][21][22] None of the control muscle biopsies had muscle fibers containing inclusions immunoreactive for LDLR, VLDLR, or LRP, or containing accumulations of free cholesterol in the form of the inclusions characteristic of the IBM vacuolated muscle fibers. In any myopathy containing them, 1) a subset of desmin-positive, regenerating muscle fibers had strong, diffuse cytoplasmic LDLR immunoreactivity and diffusely increased free cholesterol (figure 3, A through C, G and H); VLDLR and LRP were not immunoreactive in them; 2) the majority of desmin-negative necrotizing muscle fibers had increased cytoplasmic LDLR immunoreactivity and diffusely increased free cholesterol (see figure 3, A through D, F), but VLDR and LRP were not immunoreac- 

(A through C) Low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) (A) and desmin (B) immunofluorescence illustrates three small regenerating muscle fibers (upper part of panels) immunopositive for both LDLR and desmin (yellow fibers in double exposure [C]). However, desmin-negative necrotizing muscle fiber (asterisk) has diffuse LDLR immunoreactivity in (A) and is shown as red in (C). (D through H) Double fluorescence of filipin (D and H) and desmin (E and G). Desminnegative necrotizing muscle fiber in (E, asterisk) is strongly filipin-positive (D and F). Desmin-immunoreactive small regenerating fibers (G) contain diffuse filipin positivity (H). Original magnification ϫ1,250 (A through H).

tive in them; and 3) macrophages had strong filipin positivity (not shown).

At the postsynaptic domain of the neuromuscular junctions, in all control and IBM biopsies containing NMJ, LDLR, and VLDLR were accumulated (figure 4), but LRP was not detectable. It was difficult to determine whether free cholesterol was increased in the postsynaptic region. Medium-sized blood vessels and capillaries were stronglyto-moderately filipin-positive. When present in the biopsies, myelin of the IM nerve twigs had strong filipin positivity (not shown).

Immuno-electron microscopy. In IBM vacuolated muscle fibers, both LDLR and VLDLR were prominently accumulated on 6-to 10-nm amyloid fibrils and on electrondense clumps of amorphous material (figure 5, B and D, and figure 6, A through C), both structures were previously shown to contain A␤. 2 LDLR, but not VLDLR, was associated with PHFs (see figure 5, A and C). Double immunolabeling of LDLR and APOE, using two different sizes of gold particles, revealed their colocalization on 6-to 10-nm amyloid fibrils and amorphous material, and on PHFs (see figure 5, C and D).

Discussion. By demonstrating abnormal accumulation of LDLR family members and free cholesterol in IBM VMFs, our studies suggest a possible novel role for them in the IBM pathogenesis. In IBM VMFs, abnormal accumulation of LDLR and VLDLR was much more pronounced than that of LRP. It is not known whether the relative paucity of LRPpositive muscle fibers reflects 1) more limited expression of LRP, as compared with LDLR and VLDLR; 2) relative inaccessibility of LRP epitopes to the antibodies we used; or 3) LRP instability in our tissue. In IBM VMFs, both LDLR and VLDLR colocalized with focal accumulations of APOE, free cholesterol, A␤, and, LDLR with p-tau, in addition to their moderate 

. Normal human neuromuscular junctions (NMJs). Postsynaptic domain of human NMJ identified by ␣-bungarotoxin (␣-BT) binding (B and D) have increased low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) (A) and very lowdensity lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR) (C) immunoreactivity, which closely colocalizes with ␣-BT binding. Original magnification ϫ1,250 (A through D). Figure 5. Gold immuno-electron microscopy of IBM vacuolated fibers. (A and B) Low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) identified by 5-nm gold particles is associated with a cluster of paired helical filaments (PHFs) (A), and with 6-to 10-nm fibrils and small clumps of amorphous material (B). Original magnification ϫ85,000 (A and B). (C and D) Double labeling of LDLR (10-nm gold) and (5-nm gold). Both LDLR and APOE are associated with PHFs (C), 6-to 10-nm fibrils and amorphous material (D). On PHFs, APOE appears more abundant. Original magnification ϫ67,200 (C and D).

diffuse cytoplasmic immunoreactivities. Accordingly, LDLR and VLDLR, and perhaps LRP to a lesser extent, either alone or in association with their cargo molecules APOE and cholesterol, may play a role in the IBM-pathogenic cascade.

Colocalization of APOE with the accumulated LDLR and VLDLR suggests the following: 1) the dissociation of APOE from its LDL receptors that normally follow endocytosis 7 might be inhibited in the IBM pathogenic process; 2) APOE together with its receptor becomes trapped within the abnormal muscle fibers, possibly because of the known ability of APOE to bind to both A␤ and p-tau 23,24 ; or 3) APOE, LDLR, and VLDLR each bind independently to A␤ and the first two (but not VLDLR) also bind to p-tau.

Cholesterol is a component of native apoEcontaining lipoprotein particles. 25 With filipin cytochemistry, we demonstrated that IBM VMF contained accumulations of free (non-esterified) cholesterol that colocalized with LDLR and VLDLR immunoreactive inclusions, as well as with A␤ and phosphorylated tau. This may suggest that in IBM abnormal muscle fibers, the increased accumulation of free cholesterol may represent another consequence, in addition to APOE accumulation, of the increased expression and ectopic accumulation of LDLR and, to a lesser degree, of VLDLR. Whether other mechanisms known to regulate intracellular free cholesterol content 8,26 are also involved in IBM muscle fibers is not known.

A possible pathogenic role that abnormally accumulated free cholesterol may play in IBM muscle fibers can be considered. By biochemistry, in normal mammalian brain and various types of cultured cells, A␤PP and A␤ are concentrated in the cholesterol-rich domains of the plasmalemma and intracellular membranes. 27 Cholesterol influences A␤PP processing resulting in increased A␤ production, binds to A␤ and, by altering A␤ conformation, appears to enhance its amyloidogenic properties. [28][29][30][31][32][33] Experimental loading of cultured cells with free cholesterol caused increased generation of A␤ from A␤PP, whereas cholesterol-depletion exerted the opposite effect. 28 The mechanism by which cholesterol influences A␤PP processing is not known, but one possibility may involve direct or indirect inhibition of an ␣-secretase, 29 such as ADAM10 (A Disintegrin and Metalloprotease 10). 30 Experimentally altered intracellular trafficking of cholesterol in cultured cells causes co-accumulation of aggregated A␤ and free cholesterol in the same intracellular deposits. 31 We propose that within IBM abnormal muscle fibers, cholesterol instead of being properly metabolized 8,26 is deposited in association with LDLR, VLDLR, LRP, and apoE at site(s) of A␤ accumulation and possibly at sites of A␤PP processing. At those sites, cholesterol might be increasing A␤ production and inducing A␤ amyloidogenesis (v.s.). Because focal accumulations of free cholesterol also colocalized with p-tau in the IBM VMFs, it is possible that cholesterol also influenced tau phosphorylation and PHFs formation, as it is known to do in the Niemann-Pick type C disease brain 34 and in cell culture. 35 Whether accumulated free cholesterol induces other pathogenic consequences 8,26 in IBM muscle fibers, including altered gene expression, 1 remains to be elucidated.

LDLR, VLDLR, and LRP may also play a role in the IBM pathogenesis independently of their ligands. For example, LRP can directly bind to membraneassociated or extracellularly secreted A␤PP and can promote A␤ production. 36 LRP and A␤PP interaction, involving the Kunitz-type protease inhibitor domain of 751-A␤PP, occurs at the extracellular portions of both proteins. 36 In IBM, 751-A␤PP is overproduced and accumulated intracellularly in abnormal muscle fibers, as are A␤PP-mRNA and congophilic amyloid containing A␤. 1 Thus, in IBM the effects of the LDLR family members and cholesterol on the A␤PP-A␤ system presumably are intracellular. Although direct binding to A␤PP appears to be a property of LRP, it is possible that LDLR and VLDLR may indirectly influence A␤PP trafficking and processing through modulating cytoplasmic adaptor proteins, such as Disabled-1 (Dab-1). 37 Within IBM abnormal fibers, a possible influence of LDLR and VLDLR on A␤PP metabolism is supported by their light microscopic colocalization with A␤, and their intracellular accumulation on 6-to 10-nm amyloid-like fibrils and amorphous material, both of which were previously demonstrated by immuno-electron microscopy to contain A␤. 2 In the current study, LDLR in IBM fibers colocalized with p-tau, suggesting that it might directly or indirectly enhance formation of the tau-containing PHFs. VLDLR did not colocalize with p-tau, but was rather diffusely increased in IBM vacuolated muscle fibers. It might increase formation of PHFs by indirectly promoting tau phosphorylation (which is considered a prelude to formation of PHFs). VLDLR is known to participate in intracellular signal transduction 9,38 and appears to indirectly target cdk5, 9 which when activated may play a role in IBM-tau phosphorylation. 39 (Although our observed changes in cholesterol and lipoprotein receptors could be nonspecific related to cell damage from an unknown cause, we consider this less likely.) In several ways analogous to our proposal regarding IBM, LDLR family members recently have been proposed to participate in AD pathogenesis. 6 Diffuse cytoplasmic increase of LDLR and free cholesterol in a subset of regenerating muscle fibers in all myopathies may reflect their increased demand for cholesterol, and possibly for some of their other ligands, during muscle fiber growth and repair. Human regenerating muscle fibers have increased APOE immunoreactivity. A subset of them has increased APOE mRNA, 4 indicating that in some stages of muscle fiber growth/repair APOE is synthesized within those fibers, 4 whereas in other stages it presumably is transported into the fiber. Much remains to be learned regarding the roles LDLR, APOE, and cholesterol in muscle-fiber growth and differentiation. Muscle fibers undergoing necrosis also had diffusely increased cytoplasmic free cholesterol and LDLR. Whether those components have a causative role in this common form of muscle fiber death is not known. In all muscle biopsies, LDLR and VLDLR, but not LRP, were concentrated at the postsynaptic domain of NMJ (as are several other proteins 1 pathologically accumulated in IBM fibers). This is in agreement with our previous immunolocalization of APOE 4 at NMJ, and with data of others demonstrating active endocytosis at the NMJ. 40 Our results suggest a previously unrecognized function of the normal NMJ in delivery of lipoproteins into the muscle fibers. Based on their anatomic location, LDLR and VLDLR may be involved in nerve-muscle signal transduction, communication, and trophic interaction.

Acknowledgment

The authors thank Maggie Baburyan for excellent technical assistance in electron microscopy and photography.

Access www.neurology.org now for full-text articles

Figure 3 .3Figure 3. Double-labeled fluorescence of regenerating and necrotic muscle fibers in morphologically nonspecific myopathy.(A through C) Low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) (A) and desmin (B) immunofluorescence illustrates three small regenerating muscle fibers (upper part of panels) immunopositive for both LDLR and desmin (yellow fibers in double exposure [C]). However, desmin-negative necrotizing muscle fiber (asterisk) has diffuse LDLR immunoreactivity in (A) and is shown as red in (C). (D through H) Double fluorescence of filipin (D and H) and desmin (E and G). Desminnegative necrotizing muscle fiber in (E, asterisk) is strongly filipin-positive (D and F). Desmin-immunoreactive small regenerating fibers (G) contain diffuse filipin positivity (H). Original magnification ϫ1,250 (A through H).

Figure 44Figure 4. Normal human neuromuscular junctions (NMJs). Postsynaptic domain of human NMJ identified by ␣-bungarotoxin (␣-BT) binding (B and D) have increased low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) (A) and very lowdensity lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR) (C) immunoreactivity, which closely colo-calizes with ␣-BT binding. Original magnification ϫ1,250 (A through D).

Figure 6 .6Figure 6. Gold immuno-electron microscopy of lowdensity lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR) in IBM vacuolated muscle fibers. VLDLR (10-nm gold particles) is localized to 6-to 10-nm fibrils (B), amorphous (A), and membranous (C) material. Original magnification ϫ42,700 (A), ϫ33,200 (B), ϫ26,500 (C).

