A pilot randomized trial of oxandrolone in inclusion body myositis

Background: Inclusion body myositis (IBM) remains without effective therapy. As anabolic steroids have myotrophic properties, the authors studied whether a synthetic androgen, oxandrolone, would have efficacy in IBM. Methods: A double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover design was used. Patients received oxandrolone or placebo for 12 weeks followed by a minimum 2-month washout period, followed by 12 weeks of the alternative treatment. Maximal voluntary isometric contraction testing (MVICT), manual muscle testing (MMT), and functional performance testing were obtained before and after each treatment period, with the whole-body MVICT score as the primary outcome measure. Results: Of 19 patients enrolled, 16 (14 men, 2 women; median age 68.5 years) had complete data for at least the first treatment period, with 13 completing the entire study. Whole-body MVICT improved by a median of 15.5 kg with drug and 4.1 kg with placebo (p ϭ 0.06), whereas MMT demonstrated a median increase of 2.0 Medical Research Council points with drug and 0.9 point with placebo (p ϭ 0.33). Upper-extremity MVICT demonstrated a significant treatment effect, with strength increasing a median 6.3 kg with drug vs 2.5 kg with placebo (p ϭ 0.006). Stair climbing also increased a median of 1 step on average with drug versus no change with placebo (p Ͻ 0.001). Minimal adverse effects occurred. Conclusions: Oxandrolone had a borderline significant effect in improving whole-body strength and a significant effect in improving upper-extremity strength as measured by MVICT. Given these findings, further study of this drug, possibly in combination with an immunomodulating agent, is warranted.

Inclusion body myositis (IBM) is characterized by slowly progressive, asymmetric atrophy and weakness of both proximal and distal arm and leg muscles, most prominently affecting the finger and wrist flexors, quadriceps, and tibialis anterior. 1 The sporadic form of this disorder is now considered the most common acquired inflammatory myopathy in individuals over age 50 years, although hereditary forms of this disorder have also been described in younger people. 2 Unfortunately, there remains no effective treatment for either form of this disorder. Given pathologic evidence of muscle inflammation in the sporadic form, including the presence of CD8 ϩ cytotoxic T cells invading major histocompatibility class I-expressing non-necrotic muscle fibers, 2,3 as seen in polymyositis, treatment aimed at reducing inflammation has been pursued. To date, however, most studies have demonstrated that immunosuppressive regimens have minimal or no benefit in IBM patients. Although drugs such as corticosteroids, methotrexate, and cyclophosphamide may reduce the degree of inflammation on biopsy and lower serum creatine kinase levels, clear clinical improvement has not been demonstrated. 4,5 Similarly, in one study evaluating the effect of IV immune globulin (IVIg) in IBM, although some modest improvements in lowerlimb strength and swallowing occurred, whole-body strength did not increase significantly. 6 A more recent study of IVIg combined with prednisone also failed to demonstrate a definite clinical improvement. 7 Like other immunomodulating treatments, however, IVIg can lead to a marked reduction of inflammation on muscle biopsy. 8 Over the past several years, there has been increasing evidence that primary muscle fiber degeneration plays an important role in the development and progression of IBM. 2,9,10 In fact, the identification of ␤-amyloid, ubiquitin, phosphorylated tau, and prion protein has raised the possibility that IBM may be a primary degenerative disorder of muscle. [11][12][13][14][15] Given the apparent lack of efficacy of immunomodulating therapies, these findings raise the consideration that other therapeutic modalities not directed at the treatment of inflammation might be useful.

Anabolic steroids increase muscle bulk and strength, and supraphysiologic doses of testosterone, especially when combined with exercise, have been shown to increase fat-free mass and muscle size in normal men. 16 A more potent synthetic analogue of testosterone, oxandrolone (Oxandrin, Biotechnology General Corp., Iselin, NJ), is also available for study and is currently Food and Drug Administration approved as an orphan drug for the treatment of Turner's syndrome, constitutional delay of growth and puberty, and HIV wasting. This drug has been shown to increase muscle protein synthesis in normal young men 17 and to be modestly effective in improving strength in boys with Duchenne muscular dystrophy. 18,19 Hence, we undertook a trial to determine whether oxandrolone would be effective in improving strength, as measured by maximal voluntary isometric contraction testing (MVICT) and manual muscle testing (MMT), in patients with sporadic IBM.

Patients and methods. Patients. Patients with a history of sporadic IBM were solicited through colleagues at other medical centers in New England and by advertisement in the Myositis Association of America Newsletter. All patients were required to fulfill pathologic criteria for a definite diagnosis of IBM. 2 These criteria included a muscle biopsy with characteristic features of the disease, including invasion of non-necrotic muscle fibers by mononuclear cells, vacuolated muscles fibers, and intracellular deposits of amyloid and/or 15-to 18-nm tubulofilaments on electron microscopy. In addition, all patients were required to have consistent clinical and laboratory features including prominent weakness of quadriceps, weakness of wrist flexors greater than extensors, age older than 40 years, and elevated serum creatine kinase, without evidence of other significant neurologic problems. We excluded patients with a history of prostate or breast cancer, hemodialysis, congestive heart failure, atypical or restricted forms of IBM, a coexisting neuromuscular condition, uncontrolled hypertension, a history of substance abuse, and those currently taking warfarin. Patients were also excluded if they had received IVIg within 2 months or were currently on an immunosuppressive drug regimen including corticosteroids.

Study design. The study was approved by the Committee on Clinical Investigations at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, and all evaluations were performed at the medical center. All patients signed the approved consent form prior to study. A randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled, two-period, two-treatment, crossover design was used. Patients were assigned to receive oxandrolone at a dose of 20 mg/day orally (10 mg twice/day) or placebo for the first 12-week period by a four-person blockrandomization procedure performed by the hospital research pharmacy. Drug and visually identical placebo were supplied by BioTechnology General Corporation (Iselin, NJ) and dispensed by the research pharmacy. After a washout period of at least 2 months and no greater than 4 months, a time period that was chosen based on the drug's relatively short duration of action, patients received the alternative treatment for a period of 12 weeks. Patients were evaluated at the beginning and end of each treatment period, with additional serologic evaluation at 6 weeks in each treatment period (see below). The first treatment period was to begin within 2 weeks of the screening visit. The principal investigator, coinvestigators, nurses, and physical therapists were blinded to the treatment assignments, and the randomization code was maintained in the hospi-tal research pharmacy. The randomization code was not broken until all patients had either completed the study or had withdrawn. Patients were also specifically requested not to initiate or change any exercise regimen during the study.

At the screening evaluation, after the patients reviewed and signed the informed consent, inclusion and exclusion criteria were reviewed verbally with the patients and medical histories and biopsy reports analyzed. Patients then underwent a brief generalized examination, a comprehensive review of systems, EKG, and screening laboratory studies including urine analysis, liver function tests, cholesterol levels, serum calcium level, and in men prostatespecific antigen (PSA) test. Patients with a serum total cholesterol level of Ͼ300 mg/dL, 3ϩ proteinuria, serum calcium level of Ͼ10.9 mg/dL, or aspartate aminotransferase (AST) or alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels of Ͼ80 (two times the upper limit of normal for our laboratory) were excluded. At each of the following visits (except the first baseline if performed within 2 weeks of the screening visit), liver function tests, cholesterol levels, PSA, and urinalysis were repeated.

Assessments. Assessments were performed four times on each patient: at the beginning and end of the first treatment period, at the end of the washout period (used as the baseline measurement for the second treatment period), and after 12 weeks on the second treatment. Measurements are described in detail below.

The primary outcome measure was whole-body MVICT testing. Secondary outcome measures included whole-body MMT, physical function testing, upper-extremity MVICT, lower-extremity MVICT, upper-extremity MMT, and lower-extremity MMT. These last four outcomes were considered of interest prior to the study, given that previous work by others had demonstrated significant improvements in only certain limbs.

MVICT. Standard MVICT was performed by one of three trained physical therapists using a standard computerized apparatus (Biomech Designs, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada). Each therapist evaluated the same patient throughout the study and had intra-and inter-reliability measurements indicating a variability of no greater than 15% between measurements. The following actions were evaluated bilaterally: shoulder extension, shoulder flexion, elbow extension, elbow flexion, grip, knee flexion, knee extension, and foot dorsiflexion. All testing was performed in standardized positions for each muscle group, maintaining the joint to be tested in a 90°position. Grip strength was evaluated using a Jamar hand dynamometer (J.A. Preston, Corp., Jackson, MI) and included with the other MVICT values. For each action, testing was performed twice and the higher score accepted. Once the results were obtained, we used a Z-score transformation, based on the mean and SD of all baseline data collected, to standardize the MVICT for each individual joint and then summed these results for a whole-body megascore used to assess the significance of the treatment effect. 20 As differences have been found for the effect of IVIg on the upper versus lower extremities, 6 we also calculated a separate bilateral upper-extremity megascore and a bilateral lowerextremity megascore. If an accurate measurement could not be obtained during one of the visits (e.g., immobilization of a leg secondary to trauma, acute arthritis in a joint), measurements of that joint were excluded for all other visits.

MMT. Manual muscle strength testing was performed by one of three physician examiners. The examiner who performed the baseline evaluation for a given patient performed all subsequent examinations for that patient throughout the study. Strength was measured using an expanded Medical Research Council (MRC) scale, which incorporates "ϩ" and "Ϫ" on a scale of 1 to 5 for values Ն3. 21 For example, a score of 4ϩ was tallied as 4.33; a score of 5Ϫ was equivalent to 4.67. The whole-body MMT was obtained by summing all of the scores for each of the different muscles tested, with a normal value of 140 MRC points. Actions included head flexion, head extension, shoulder external rotation, shoulder abduction, elbow flexion, elbow extension, wrist extension, wrist flexion, hip flexion, hip abduction, hip abduction, knee extension, knee flexion, foot dorsiflexion, and foot plantar flexion. Both upper-extremity and neck strength were evaluated with the patient sitting, whereas the lower extremities were evaluated with the patient lying supine. A single score was measured for head flexion and extension, and all of the other muscles were evaluated bilaterally. If a score could not be obtained during one of the visits for a given joint, then results from that joint were excluded from the analysis for all visits. As for MVICT, we also calculated separate upper-and lower-extremity MMT scores.

Physical function testing. In addition to evaluating strength, several tests of physical function were performed. Patients were asked to perform these tests as well as they could with assistive devices (e.g., leg braces or canes) as needed. These tests included the following:

Get-up-and-go test. This test assessed the time it took a patient to stand up from a chair (using arms if necessary), walk 3 meters, turn around, return to the chair, and sit down. The better of two trials was used for each visit.

Six-minute walk. This test assessed the distance a patient could walk in 6 minutes. Given the general disability of many patients, rather than utilizing two trials, a 2-minute "practice" walk was performed before the actual test, so as to familiarize the patients with the task to be performed.

Stair climb. This test assessed the number of steps that a patient could climb in 15 seconds. The same set of stairs was used for all patients. Again, the better of two trials was used.

Body mass index and lean body mass. These indexes were calculated by a registered dietitian certified in anthropometrics, through the use of skin fold measurements of biceps, triceps, and subscapular areas, incorporating mid-arm circumference and frame. 22 Serologic evaluation. Given that oxandrolone does have a number of potential side effects, including elevated liver function tests, changes in lipid profiles, and a slightly increased risk of breast and prostate cancer, blood tests were performed to ensure that no serious adverse reactions occurred during exposure to the drug. Liver function tests (ALT, AST, alkaline phosphatase), serum cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein (HDL), and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) were evaluated at the beginning and end of each treatment period. In addition, ALT and AST were assessed 6 weeks (halfway) through each treatment period.

Compliance. At the completion of each treatment period, the pills each patient had remaining were counted by one of the physician-investigators. Any patient that had taken Ͻ80% of the prescribed pills was considered noncompliant and discontinued from the study.

Statistical analysis. Because of concerns about the normality of the data, results for a specific treatment (oxandrolone vs placebo) were reported as the median and the interquartile (IQ) range. Results reported for the changes with oxandrolone or placebo were based on all patients completing at least one 12-week treatment period. Thus, these results are based on all patients who completed the entire study plus those who remained in the study at the end of the first treatment period on that therapy. Assessment of the statistical significance of the effect of treatment used a generalized estimating equation (GEE) approach to obtain a robust estimate of the treatment effect using the measurement at week 12 of each intervention as the outcome variable. 23 The baseline value before each intervention and a period effect (which adjusts for potential learning effects) were included as fixed effects in the model. The model incorporated the crossover design by treating measurements over both treatment periods as repeated measurements within a subject, with an exchangeable correlation structure. This model provides an estimate Ϯ SE of the treatment effect with an associated p value. The Wilcoxon rank sum test was used to assess the presence of carryover effect, comparing the difference between the first and second baseline measurements between the two treatment orders, and to compare baseline characteristics between the groups of patients randomized to the two treatment orders. The Wilcoxon signed rank test was used to compare change within a group when examining the existence of a learning effect, and the sign test (one sided) was used to assess the significance of patient beliefs about treatment assignment.

Results. An outline of study participation is shown in figure 1. Of the 22 patients who were screened at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 3 were excluded. One had profoundly advanced disease with a severe, almost complete quadriplegia, and two had atypical clinical presentations. Of the 19 patients who were enrolled, 2 withdrew (1 receiving placebo and 1 receiving drug) before completing the first treatment period because of difficulties in traveling to Boston. A third patient was withdrawn before the completion of the first treatment period for being noncompliant. These patients were excluded from the analysis entirely. Two additional patients discontinued during the washout period: one who received placebo discontinued owing to difficulties in traveling to Boston, whereas the other who received drug was so impressed with the improvement in his gait that he refused to enter the second treatment period. Thus, 14 patients began the second treatment period, during which time 1 withdrew (while receiving drug owing to the occurrence of a possible TIA in conjunction with difficulties in traveling to Boston), leaving 13 to complete the entire protocol. Thus, the changes reported on oxandrolone are based on the 15 patients completing an active treatment period, while the changes reported on placebo are based on the 14 patients completing a placebo period. The modeling strategy for assessing the statistical significance of the treatment incorporates data from all 16 patients, although the results from the 13 patients who completed both parts of the study are much more influential than the results from the 3 who completed only one. Of the 16 patients who were included in any analysis, 14 were men and 2 were women (mean age 68.5 years, range 55 to 83 years). The baseline characteristics of the group, including comparisons between the two groups, are summarized in table 1.

After 12 weeks of oxandrolone treatment, the primary outcome measure, whole-body MVICT, demonstrated a near-significant change compared with placebo (figure 2), with an overall increase of 15.5 kg (ϩ3.7 to ϩ21.7 kg) (median and IQ range) with drug compared with 4.0 kg (Ϫ3.9 to ϩ17.4 kg) with placebo. After converting MVICT scores for individual muscles into Z scores and calculating the sum (or megascore), this gave an overall treatment effect of 1.27 Ϯ 0.68 (GEE estimate with associated SE, p ϭ 0.061). Whole-body MMT did not show a significant difference between drug and placebo, increasing 2.0 MRC points (0.3 to 4.7 points) and 0.9 MRC point (Ϫ0.6 to ϩ2.3 points), respectively (figure 3), giving an overall treatment effect of 0.94 Ϯ 0.96 MRC point (p ϭ 0.33). When evaluating the upper and lower extremities separately, a significant treatment effect of 1.45 Ϯ 0.53 (p ϭ 0.006) was found for upper-extremity strength by MVICT. However, with MMT, a treatment effect of 0.74 Ϯ 0.57 MRC point was found that was not significant (p ϭ 0.20). Lower-extremity strength did not improve by either measure (for MVICT, a treatment effect of Ϫ0.15 Ϯ 0.46 [p ϭ 0.75], and for MMT, a treatment effect of 0.04 Ϯ 0.73 MRC point [p ϭ 0.96]).

By comparing the change between baselines between those receiving drug in the first half of the study vs those receiving placebo, no significant carryover effect of drug was identified for either whole-body MVICT or whole-body MMT (both p Ͼ 0.10). In the group of patients who received placebo first, an increase in median baseline wholebody strength as measured by MVICT occurred at the beginning of the second treatment period (immediately prior to receiving drug) of 6.25 kg (p ϭ 0.0625), suggesting that a marginal learning effect was present. However, for MMT, an increase of only 1.00 MRC point occurred (p ϭ 0.16).  Of the physical performance tests, neither the get-upand-go test nor the 6-minute walk demonstrated a treatment effect (1.4 Ϯ 1.3 seconds [p ϭ 0.29] and Ϫ6.3 Ϯ 21 feet [p ϭ 0.76], respectively). However, on the stair climb test, a significant median improvement of 1 step in patients receiving drug vs no change in those receiving placebo occurred, giving a treatment effect of 2.4 Ϯ 0.6 steps (p Ͻ 0.001).

Body mass index demonstrated a nonsignificant treatment effect of Ϫ0.33 Ϯ 0.50 kg/m 2 . However, lean body mass increased 1.1% (Ϫ0.9 to 2.8%) with drug treatment and decreased by 0.6% (Ϫ3.3 to 1.9) with placebo, giving a significant treatment effect of 1.6 Ϯ 0.64% (p ϭ 0.014).

To further investigate the isolated finding of improved stair climb, we performed a post hoc analysis to evaluate whether a treatment effect was present in the proximal muscles of the lower extremities alone. However, no significant difference between drug and placebo was identified for either MVICT or MMT.

Although not significant, of 13 patients who completed both treatment periods, 8 correctly reported that they were on drug and 3 reported that they were on drug when they were really receiving placebo (p Ͼ 0.1, sign test). The remaining two patients had no bias one way or the other.

Most patients did not report significant side effects. One female patient noted that the drug made her feel "strange," although she could not be more precise. One patient noted the development of mild acne. A third patient who received drug during the second treatment period had a possible TIA and abruptly withdrew, not returning for the final evaluation. No patient noted significant adverse effects while taking placebo.

ALT and AST levels did demonstrate significant increases, although the degree of change was small, with median values falling minimally outside the range of normal for the hospital laboratory (table 2). Conversely, alkaline phosphatase decreased significantly. A significant decrease was observed for HDL levels and a significant increase for LDL; however, the change in total cholesterol was nonsignificant (an increase of 32 mg/dL [IQ range Ϫ28 to 46 mg/dL]).

Discussion. This study has demonstrated a borderline significant effect of oxandrolone as compared with placebo in improving whole-body strength as measured by MVICT in IBM patients; no significant effect was observed in MMT. This improvement in whole-body MVICT, however, appeared to be due mainly to an effect of improved upper-extremity strength, with little change occurring in the lower extremities. In addition, the drug significantly improved stair climbing, although no improvement occurred for other measures of performance. Although these effects may represent only chance associations, it is also possible that the drug is exhibiting some beneficial effect. That lean body mass increased significantly with oxandrolone as compared with placebo also helps support the supposition that at least some muscles of patients with IBM are responsive to anabolic compounds. Unfortunately, the relatively small number of subjects who eventually completed the trial limited our ability to conclusively identify these rather subtle effects. Our study initially intended for 20 subjects to complete the entire protocol, which would have had 80% power to detect a difference of approximately 0.67 population SD be-  tween the effects of drug versus placebo. With only 16 people for the final analysis, the power decreased substantially. In addition, although a 12-week treatment period was chosen based on the results of other studies using androgens, 18 this period of time may have been too short to detect a change in strength compared with placebo. On the other hand, just as the disease appears to strike certain muscle groups preferentially, it is possible that some muscle groups may be more responsive to this medication. For example, IVIg appears to improve lower-extremity strength more than upper-extremity strength. 6 It is not clear why stair-climbing ability should have improved with drug when neither of the other lower-extremity function tests nor lower-extremity strength demonstrated improvement. Our post hoc analysis failed to reveal an isolated change in proximal lower-extremity strength to account for this finding. One potential explanation would be that most of the IBM patients used their arms to help pull themselves up the stairs, and perhaps the improved strength in the upper extremities translated into improved speed on stair climb. Likewise, increased strength in the use of walking aids (e.g., canes and crutches) may also have occurred. When informally asked about any improvements in gait or ability to climb to stairs, patients generally noted no significant change whether receiving drug or placebo.

Most patients tolerated the drug well without reported side effects. Although IBM is much less common in women than men, long-term use of the drug in women could produce some virilizing side effects such as temporal balding, deepening of the voice, or development of facial hair. More significant in our population was the reduction in HDL and increase in LDL levels observed during drug treatment in some patients, which might potentially limit the use of the drug. Although cholesterol-lowering medications could be used to reverse this effect, many of these are potentially myotoxic and therefore perhaps best avoided in this disease. No patient developed clinically significant hepatitis in this study; however, mild elevations in serum transaminase levels did occur. Another interpretation of these mild elevations in ALT and AST is that they represent enhanced myolysis. Unfortunately, we obtained neither serum creatine kinase nor ␥-glutamyltransferase levels, and hence the interpretation of these changes remains uncertain. However, the rise in both levels was quite mild, and the fact that AST increased slightly less than ALT would argue against the source of this being muscle, as muscle has a much greater supply of AST than ALT, whereas the liver has similar amounts of both enzymes. Other longterm untoward effects of oxandrolone also need to be considered should this drug find clinical utility in this disease. For example, prolonged use of oxandrolone can result in an increased risk of prostate and breast cancer as well as liver disease. The ele-vated serum cholesterol profiles could also lead to premature atherosclerosis.

In addition to the issues noted above regarding the relatively small number of people who completed this study, there are three other issues that might impact our results. First, as measured by both MVICT and MMT (table 1), the median strength of the group of patients receiving placebo first was significantly higher than that of those receiving drug first. Although crossover studies should, in theory, limit the effect of such imbalance, this difference still might have some confounding effect. Another concern was a suggestion that patients could identify whether they were on drug or placebo; this may also have impacted our results. Finally, we adopted the GEE approach to allow us to use all the data available, including the data from patients who completed only the first treatment period. We felt that this was important, given the small number of participants completing the study and to avoid an assumption about the normality of the data. However, because the GEE approach calculates robust p values based on large-scale asymptotic properties, the true p values may be higher than we report.

An argument might be made that even if oxandrolone does increase strength through direct effects on muscle fibers, the inflammatory response in IBM is not being addressed by this treatment. In fact, use of oxandrolone in combination with an immunosuppressive regimen or IVIG could have more substantial benefits than the use of oxandrolone alone. It is also possible that regular exercise could enhance the effects of oxandrolone, as exercise in combination with supraphysiologic doses of testosterone has been shown to increase muscle bulk and mass. 16 However, we chose to exclude exercise from this study, as standardizing regimens among patients with differing degrees of weakness would have been very difficult.

This study was designed to determine whether oxandrolone could serve a role in improving the strength of IBM patients and not to evaluate its efficacy in inhibiting disease progression. As with other published treatment trials in IBM, the small numbers of patients studied and relatively short trial time restrict the interpretation of our results. Despite these limitations, our study identified a borderline significant effect in improving whole-body strength as measured by MVICT, our primary outcome measure. We believe that these partial effects warrant a larger, longer trial of oxandrolone, preferably in combination with an immune-modulating treatment such as IVIg.

Supported in part by grant RR01032 to the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center General Clinical Research Center from the National Institute of Health and by BioTechnology General Corporation (Iselin, NJ), which provided drug and placebo.

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. Outline of study participation.

Figure 3 .3Figure 3. Changes in whole-body, upper-extremity, and lower-extremity manual muscle testing (MMT) scores for the 16 subjects who completed at least one treatment period. MRC ϭ Medical Research Council. Black dots indicate outlying individual data point.

Table 11Baseline demographicsPeriod 1:Period 1:DemographicsplacebodrugOverallNo. of subjects7916Age, y66.071.068.5Sex, M/F6/18/114/2Height, cm171.6174.0173.95Weight, kg74.4578.675.70Body mass index, kg/m 224.5026.926.50Lean body mass, kg65.0066.365.65Whole-body MVICT, kg186.7*144.1*169.2Whole-body MMT, MRC125.0 †115.3 †120.4pointsMedians given for all demographic values except gender. Onlysubjects who completed at least one treatment period are in-cluded in this table.* p ϭ 0.03. † p ϭ 0.008. MVICT ϭ maximal voluntary isometric contraction testing; MMT ϭ manual muscle testing; MRC ϭ Medical Research Council.Figure 2. Changes in whole-body, upper-extremity, and lower-extremity raw maximal voluntary isometric conraction testing (MVICT) scores (prior to Z-score transformation) for the 16 subjects who completed at least one treatment period. Black dots indicate outlying individual data point.

Table 22Serologic studiesChange in levelChange in levelon oxandrolone,on placebo,Testmedian (IQ range)median (IQ range)p ValueTotal cholesterol, mg/dLϩ32 (Ϫ28 to 46)Ϫ6.5 (Ϫ14 to 16)0.25HDL, mg/dLϪ21.5 (Ϫ34 to Ϫ16)Ϫ0.0 (Ϫ3 to 2)Ͻ0.001LDL, mg/dLϩ48.5 (15 to 85)ϩ4 (Ϫ20 to 25)0.011ALT, IU/Lϩ7.5 (1 to 19)Ϫ5.5 (Ϫ10 to 0)0.034AST, IU/Lϩ6 (5 to 8)Ϫ3 (Ϫ7 to 1.5)Ͻ0.001Alkaline phosphatase, IU/LϪ17.0 (Ϫ30 to 0)ϩ1 (Ϫ5 to 5)Ͻ0.001PSA, g/LϪ0.2 (Ϫ0.7 to 0.2)ϩ0.1 (Ϫ0.05 to 0.45)0.15IQ ϭ interquartile; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; PSA, prostate-specific antigen.

