Newest Pathogenetic Considerations in Inclusion-body Myositis: Possible Role of Amyloid-β, Cholesterol, Relation to Aging and to Alzheimer's Disease

Introduction

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM) is the most common, progressive, and debilitating muscle disease of older persons [1••,2••]. This report concentrates on new concepts of the pathogenesis of s-IBM.

The term hereditary inclusion-body myopathies (h-IBMs) [3] designates hereditary muscle diseases with pathology strikingly resembling that of s-IBM, but lacking lymphocytic inflammation. The h-IBMs are not discussed in this report, but there is a recent review [4].

An intriguing aspect of the s-IBM muscle-fiber molecular phenotype is its remarkable similarity to that of Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain [1••]. These similarities include accumulations of amyloid-β precursor protein (AβPP), amyloid-β (Aβ), phosphorylated tau in the form of paired-helical filaments (PHFs), presenilin-1, and several other "Alzheimer-characteristic proteins" [1••].

Brief Summary of Clinical Features

The onset of s-IBM is usually after age 50 years, predominantly in men [1••,2••,5]. The muscle weakness is distal and proximal in the lower and upper limbs. The quadriceps is prominently involved [1••,5,6•]. The slowly progressive course of s-IBM usually leads to severe disability and eventually to respiratory muscle weakness. Dysphagia is fairly common.

The "late-juvenile" s-IBM (LJ-sIBM) form [7] was recently observed in three young unrelated men with a similar distribution of muscle weakness to that of s-IBM, but with onset in their late teens (two patients) and at age 20 (one patient). Their muscle biopsy had features of s-IBM, with some aspects of h-IBM. Askanas and Engel [7] proposed that yet-unknown susceptibility genes may be responsible for the early onset of s-IBM in these patients.

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis is rarely associated with other systemic disorders. However, the following associations deserve mention because they may provide clues to the pathogenesis.

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis and transthyretin gene mutation

Askanas et al. [8•] recently described a 70-year-old African-American man who has s-IBM and cardiac amyloidosis and is homozygous for the transthyretin (TTR) Val122Ile mutation. Unique pathologic features of his muscle biopsy included prominent blood-vessel congophylic amyloid immunoreactive for transthyretin and, within the vacuolated muscle fibers, congophilic deposits co-immunoreactive for transthyretin and Aβ.

This report summarizes clinical features and diagnostic criteria, and the newest advances related to seeking the pathogenic mechanism(s) of sporadic inclusion-body myositis. On the basis of the authors' research, several processes seem to be important in relation to the still-speculative pathogenesis: increased transcription and accumulation of amyloid-β precursor protein and accumulation of its proteolytic fragment amyloid-β; abnormal accumulation of components related to lipid metabolism (eg, low-density lipoprotein receptors and cholesterol; accumulation of cholestorol is possibly caused by its abnormal trafficking); oxidative stress; accumulations of other Alzheimer-related proteins including phosphorylated tau; a milieu of muscle cellular aging in which these changes occur. The authors' basic hypothesis is that overexpression of amyloid-β precursor protein within the aging muscle fibers is an early upstream event causing the subsequent pathogenic cascade. The remarkable pathologic similarities between inclusion-body myositis muscle and Alzheimer's disease brain are discussed.

The TTR Val122Ile mutation is the most common cause of senile cardiac amyloidosis among African-Americans [9]. Askanas et al. [8•] suggest that the TTR mutation in their patient might be promoting the amyloid-fibrillogenesis of Aβ within the muscle fibers and muscle blood vessels. In this particular patient, the senile cardiac amyloidosis, muscle blood-vessel amyloidosis, and s-IBM all possibly relate to the TTR mutation, raising the possibility that other, possibly-benign mutations of various susceptibility genes may promote s-IBM in other patients. If the TTR Val122Ile mutation was a factor in the s-IBM pathogenesis in our patient, then it had existed since conception, but his muscle weakness did not develop until after the age of 60, suggesting the importance of an aging cellular environment for development of s-IBM (as described in this report).

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis and post-polio syndromes

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis in post-polio patients has been described [5], raising possibility that the previous virus infection in some manner was related to the patients' subsequent development of s-IBM.

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis and human T-cell leukemia virus-1 seropositivity

Several patients with s-IBM had human T-cell leukemia virus-1 (HTLV-1) seropositivity and s-IBM, raising suspicion that this virus may cause s-IBM and supporting our general hypothesis that s-IBM may have a viral aspect of its pathogenesis [1••,5,6•,10]. In one of the patients, HTLV-1 p19 antigen was detected immunocytochemically within the muscle fibers [11]. A recently reported patient with s-IBM and HTLV-1 associated myelopathy had IBM-characteristic muscle fibers containing the proviral DNA and viral messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) transcripts [12••]. In other patients with s-IBM seropositive for HTLV-1, no HTLV-1 antigen was detectable in the muscle fibers [13].

Others

Rare associations of s-IBM with other syndromes have been reported and reviewed [5].

Diagnostic Criteria of the Sporadic Inclusion-body Myositis Muscle Biopsy

Light-microscopic histochemistry and immunocytochemistry Characteristic features of s-IBM are muscle fibers with one or several vacuoles on a given 10-µm thick cross-section and degrees of lymphocytic inflammation, with some macrophages, varying from abundant in early stages to little or none in later stages of involvement of the sampled muscle. Sixty percent to 80% of the s-IBM vacuolated muscle fibers contain, mainly in their non-vacuolated regions, foci of amyloid as defined by Congo-red fluorescence visualized through Texas-red filters [14].

To diagnose s-IBM, the authors recommend the following performed on 10-µm sections of a fresh-frozen muscle biopsy: 1) Engel-Gomori trichrome stain to visualize, in addition to mononuclear-cell inflammation and vacuolated muscle fibers, small angular fibers, ragged-red fibers, rare necrotizing fibers and regen-degen fibers; 2) fluorescence-enhanced Congo-red; 3) SMI-31 monoclonal antibody immunocytochemical staining, which recognizes the phosphorylated tau of PHFs in s-IBM [15]; 4) if SMI-31 antibody is not available, then ubiquitin immunoreactivity within muscle fibers of s-IBM can be used to differentiate it from polymyositis [16,17].

Mitochondria abnormalities that are characteristic but not diagnostic features of the s-IBM pathology include ragged-red fibers and cytochrome-c-oxidase (COX) negative muscle fibers [1••,5]. Multiple mitochondrial DNA deletions [18,19] occur in s-IBM muscle. The authors propose that overexpression of AβPP/Aβ may contribute to the mitochondrial abnormalities [20]. Contribution of the mitochondrial abnormalities to muscle-fiber malfunction and degeneration is yet undefined.

Small angular muscle fibers, histochemically dark with the pan-esterase or NADH-tetrazolium-reductase reactions, are generally considered indicative of recent-denervation. They are a characteristic feature of s-IBM muscle biopsies and probably contribute to the clinical muscle weakness. Askanas and Engel [1••,5] and others consider that there is an important denervation component in s-IBM.

Ultrastructural abnormalities

Characteristic are clusters of 15 to 21 nm diameter PHFs containing phosphorylated tau [15,21], located in vacuolated and non-vacuolated muscle fibers, strikingly resembling PHFs of AD brain. The s-IBM muscle-fiber cytoplasm also contains Aβ-positive collections of 6 to 10 nm filaments, fine flocculomembranous material, and amorphous material [1••]. Within the vacuoles, myelin-like whorls, sometimes appearing like "cabbage bodies" [22], and other lysosomal debris are characteristically present. Abnormal mitochondria containing paracrystalline inclusions are occasionally present. In 2% to 4% of s-IBM muscle nuclei there are clusters (inclusions) of 15 to 21 nm "tubulofilaments," which in favorable sections are seen to be PHFs like those in the cytoplasm. The nuclear PHFs are sparce, comprising less than 1% of all the muscle-fiber PHFs (Askanas, Unpublished observation).

Newest Concepts of Pathogenesis

General considerations

The authors' pathologic findings in biopsies of patients with s-IBM have generated several hypotheses related to the pathogenesis of this still-enigmatic muscle disease. s-IBM is probably a multifactorial disease. The direct causes are unknown. Aging factors are likely to be an important component of the s-IBM pathogenesis. The authors have proposed that increased expression of several genes is at least one aspect underlying the demonstrated increase of the respective IBM-characteristic proteins, including accumulation within IBM muscle fibers of several proteins, in addition to AβPP, Aβ, and phosphorylated tau, for example, presenilin-1, α-synuclein, and several other proteins, most of which were previously considered characteristic of AD brain [1••]. Cellular prion protein (PrP C ) and PrP C mRNA are also accumulated in s-IBM muscle fibers [1••], but not in AD brain. It is possible that in s-IBM muscle fibers a detrimental cascade might be started by one "master-gene" product (protein) serving, directly or indirectly, as a transcription factor activating genes for at least some of these "IBM-proteins" [1••]. A putative "IBM" master-gene itself might be activated by a viral gene-product.

Overexpression of amyloid-β precursor protein and intracellular accumulation of amyloid-β appear to be early and important steps in the inclusion-body myositis pathogenesis

Possible mechanisms of amyloid-β precursor protein/amyloid-β increase Amyloid-β and AβPP have received considerable attention regarding the pathogenesis of AD [23,24]. Aβ and C-and N-terminal epitopes of AβPP are also abnormally accumulated in vacuolated and non-vacuolated regions of s-IBM muscle fibers [1••,2••]. s-IBM muscle fibers have increased mRNA signal for the AβPP-751 alternatively-spliced transcript that contains the Kunitz-type protease inhibitor motif [25]. The increased AβPP-mRNA co-localizes in the same foci as the abnormal accumulations of AβPP and Aβ immunoreactive epitopes [25]. The mechanism of AβPP overproduction in s-IBM is not clarified, but our recent studies suggest that the AP-1 transcription complex, composed of c-Jun and c-Fos, may play a role [1••].

Increased transcription and activation of c-Jun and c-Fos can occur through PKC, JNK and active ERK [26,27]. Because c-Jun, c-Fos [1••], ERK [28] and PKC (Askanas et al., unpublished data 2000) are increased in IBM muscle fibers, they may play a role in the AβPP overexpression.

Also increased in IBM muscle is Redox-factor-1 (Ref-1) [29], a protein possessing apurinic/apyrimidic endonuclease activity and ability to increase the affinity of AP1 for its binding site in the promoter region of several target genes including AβPP, thereby modulating their transcription. Ref-1 also enhances binding of the transcription factor nuclear factor-κB (NFκB) to DNA, thus participating in the increased transcription of several genes, including AβPP. Oxidative stress induces Ref-1 activation [26,30]. IBM muscle fibers contain increased NFκB [31] and markers of oxidative stress, which might also be involved in the increased AβPP transcription. RNA polymerase II is also increased in IBM fibers [32], another sign suggesting increased transcription activity.

Recently, the authors have shown that BACE1 and BACE2, which are AβPP β-secretases, are increased within IBM muscle fibers, suggesting that their overproduction may participate in AβPP processing, resulting in the increased Aβ production [33••].

Possible upstream role of amyloid-β precursor protein and amyloid-β in the inclusion-body myositis pathogenesis

The authors have proposed that key upstream roles of the increased intracellular AβPP/Aβ include causing abnormal signal transduction to modulate other genes; inducing oxidative stress; and producing mitochondrial and other abnormalities [1  [35]. Third, experimentally and genetically AβPP-overexpressing cultured muscle fibers had abnormal neuromuscular junctions (NMJs) and could not become innervated by co-cultured fetal-rat spinal-cord neurons. Therefore, McFerrin et al. [36] postulated that spontaneous AβPP overexpression in muscle of patients with s-IBM may be responsible for a "myogenous dysinnervation" and for the observed NMJ structural abnormalities [1••]. The neuromuscular synapse pathology in IBM has a parallel in the synapse pathology of AD [37], which, by analogy with IBM, the authors propose may reflect an intracellular postsynaptic pathogenic mechanism.

Most of the "IBM proteins" and "IBM mRNAs" that are accumulated in IBM muscle fibers are, in normal mature human muscle fibers, found only at the postsynaptic region of the NMJs [38]. (Phosphorylated tau is the only "IBM protein" so far not found accumulated at normal NMJs [38].) Askanas et al. [1••,5,38] termed the normal accumulation of protein and mRNA postsynaptically at the NMJ as "junctionalization" of the muscle fiber. The authors proposed a possible pathogenic role of "extrajunctionalization" in IBM muscle fibers, driven by ectopic expression of "junctional genes," perhaps under the unrestrained control of a "junctionalizing master gene."

Additional support of the authors' intracellular AβPP/ Aβ hypothesis of IBM pathogenesis was provided by two transgenic mouse models overexpressing AβPP in muscle fibers [39,40]. In both models, some aspects of the IBM pathology were produced, including fiber vacuolization, intracellular accumulation of AβPP, intracellular amyloid deposits and inflammation [39,40]. These abnormalities were evident only in aging transgenic mice, further indicating that an aging cellular environment is important for the development of IBM.

Lipoprotein receptors, cholesterol, and related mechanisms in the inclusion-body myositis pathogenesis

The low-density-lipoprotein-receptor (LDLR) gene superfamily encompasses several transplasmalemmal receptors, including LDLR, very-low-density-lipoprotein-receptor (VLDLR) and LDLR-related protein (LRP) [41,42]. The best-known function of the LDLR family is binding and delivery of lipoproteins into cells [41,42]. Other possibly relevant aspects of the LDLR family members are as follows: 1) They bind and internalize apolipoprotein E (apoE) [41]; 2) LRP influences processing of AβPP and Aβproduction in cell-culture systems [43]; 3) VLDLR might influence tau phosphorylation; 4) they are accumulated in extracellular senile plaques of AD brain [44 suggesting the following: 1) that the dissociation of apoE from its LDL receptors that normally follows endocytosis [41] might be inhibited in IBM; 2) that apoE with its receptor becomes trapped within the IBM muscle fibers, possibly as a result of the known ability of apoE to bind to Aβ and tau [45]; or 3) that apoE, LDLR, and VLDLR each bind independently to Aβ and phosphorylated-tau.

Cholesterol is a component of native apoE-containing lipoprotein particles [46]. The authors recently showed that IBM muscle fibers contained accumulations of free (non-esterified) cholesterol that colocalized with LDLR and VLDLR immunoreactive inclusions, and with Aβ and phosphorylated tau [44••]. This suggested that in IBM muscle fibers accumulation of free cholesterol may represent another consequence, in addition to apoE accumulation, of the increased expression and ectopic accumulation of LDLR and VLDLR [44••]. Most recently Kefi et al. [47] demonstrated that caveolin-1, an intracellular transporter of cholesterol, is accumulated in IBM muscle fibers, where it colocalizes with free cholesterol and Aβ. Caveolin-1, a major protein of plasmalemmal microdomain caveolae, binds cholesterol and influences its intracellular traffic and homeostasis [48]. The authors suggest that within IBM muscle fibers traffic of cholesterol is perturbed, resulting in its demonstrated accumulation there [47]. In normal mammalian brain and various types of cultured cells, AβPP and Aβ are concentrated in the cholesterol-rich domains of the plasmalemma and intracellular membranes [49]. Experimentally, cholesterol influences AβPP processing, resulting in increased Aβ production, and it increases Aβ amyloidogenesis [50,51]. Loading cultured cells with free cholesterol increased generation of Aβ from AβPP, whereas cholesterol-depletion did the opposite [44••]. The mechanism by which cholesterol influences AβPP processing is unknown, but one possibility may involve direct or indirect inhibition of an AβPP α-secretase [44••]. Cholesterol binds to Aβ [51] and, by altering Aβ conformation, enhances its amyloidogenic ("seeding") properties [44••]. Experimentally-induced abnormal intracellular trafficking of cholesterol in cultured cells, either pharmacologically or by inactivation of a gene encoding Niemann-Pick type C-1 protein (a protein that is mutated in Niemann-Pick type C disease), causes co-accumulation of aggregated Aβ and free cholesterol in the same intracellular deposits [44••].

The authors propose that within IBM muscle fibers cholesterol, instead of being properly metabolized or cleared, is deposited, in spatial association with lipoprotein receptors, apoE and caveolin-1, at sites of Aβ accumulation and possibly at sites of AβPP processing. At those sites, cholesterol might be increasing Aβ production and inducing Aβ amyloidogenesis. The authors' hypothetical considerations of cholesterol and Aβ interactions in IBM are illustrated in Figure 1.

Oxidative stress has a possible influence in the pathogenic cascade of inclusion-body myositis

There is increasing evidence that free-radical toxicity may participate in the IBM pathogenesis. Indicators of oxidative stress, and enzymes participating in the cellular defense against oxidative stress, are accumulated in IBM muscle fibers [1••].

Role of inflammation and autoimmunity

Mononuclear-cell inflammation is a component of s-IBM pathology. The inflammation varies from abundant in the early stages to little or none in the mid-and later stages of the muscle involvement. The mononuclear inflammatory cells are similar to those in polymyositis (PM), being mainly CD8 + cytotoxic T-cells and some macrophages 

in neither s-IBM nor PM is a putative antigen known. Considerations include an antigen of a yet-unidentified virus [52], an auto-antigen, or a superantigen phenomenon [52]. Other aspects of the s-IBM immune reactions have recently been reviewed [53•,54•].

Muscle-fiber aging as a likely aspect contributing to development of sporadic inclusion-body myositis

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis typically becomes clinically manifest after age 50, and more often in the 60s and 70s. Among patients with sporadic "inflammatorymyopathy," the previously described specific degenerative accumulations of proteins, mRNAs, and cholesterol within muscle fibers occur only in s-IBM, not in polymyositis or dermatomyositis. But they do occur in the h-IBMs, which typically lack the lymphocytic inflammatory component [3,4]. The authors suggest those accumulations are related to an aging-based degenerative pathogenic cascade that 1) occurs in parallel to the inflammatory component but is not dependent on it; 2) persists longer than the inflammatory component at a given site in the muscle; and 3) will require a treatment other than anti-dysimmune. (Speculatively, in s-IBM, muscle-fiber degenerative phenomena might provoke the inflammatory response, which gradually diminishes as the immune system becomes tolerant, or perhaps the degenerative phenomena and the inflammation are independently provoked by something else, such as occult virus or one of the "foreign" accumulated proteins.) Patients over age 50 with what could be considered "pure PM" are rare. Virtually all of the older patients with lymphocytic myositis have s-IBM. In s-IBM the milieu of the aging muscle fiber might modify the provocation of, and response to, the lymphocytic inflammation and promote development of the IBM-characteristic progressive vacuolar degeneration [1••].

Aging changes within muscle mitochondria [55] or elsewhere in the muscle fiber may predispose to the mitochondrial abnormalities in s-IBM, provoking a vicious circle between mitochondrial malfunctions and the oxidative stress evident in the fiber. In the cellular milieu of the aging muscle-fiber, there may be diminished homeostatic mechanisms caused by either underexpression of "youthful" genes encoding beneficial cellular factors or overexpression of yet-unknown "aging" genes encoding toxic cellular fac-tors. Such aging mechanisms may predispose to, or underlie, the muscle-fiber vacuolar-degeneration, atrophy and cell death in s-IBM.

Possible relevance of morpho-chemical similarities between inclusion-body myositis muscle and Alzheimer's disease brain

Because the same proteins accumulate within sporadic and hereditary IBM muscle fibers as accumulate in the brain of sporadic and hereditary forms of AD [1••], the muscle and the brain diseases might share certain steps in their pathogenic cascade, and knowledge of one disease might help elucidate the other. Cellular aging and evidence of oxidative stress are associated with the IBMs and ADs [1••]. The IBMs and the ADs (including sporadic and hereditary forms of both groups) are multifactorial and polygenetic. Within the IBM and AD categories, the pathologic phenotypes of sporadic and hereditary forms are very similar, despite the different direct causes being mainly non-genetic versus mainly genetic. Therefore, in each disease category it has been proposed, by the authors in the IBMs and by others in the ADs [1••], that different etiologies, including different genetic defects in the hereditary forms, lead to the same upstream step that promotes a midstream and downstream final common pathogenic cascade of events resulting in the specific cellular deterioration. Yet each disease category, IBM and AD, remains organ-specific, involving postmitotic-muscle fibers or post-mitotic-neurons. The tissue selected in the sporadic forms, muscle versus brain, may be influenced by etiologic agent (eg, virus), previous exposure to an 

Conclusions

The authors have presented their newest findings and approaches to the pathogenesis of s-IBM.

These findings have not yet provided a denouement of the cause and definitive treatment, but they have illuminated new, potentially exciting avenues to explore that could lead to long-term benefit for patients with IBM. A few patients with s-IBM definitely benefit, to some degree, from treatment with single-dose alternate-day prednisone or intravenous immunoglobin G ( [10] and Engel, current observations). In those responsive patients, the component being therapeutically regulated is not certain. It could be the mononuclear inflammatory cells in the muscle, the muscle-fiber degenerative changes, a dysimmune neuropathy, or a myogenous dysinnervation. However, much better treatment is certainly needed.

The authors have indicated the remarkable pathologic similarities between s-IBM muscle and AD brain. In AD, the toxicity of Aβ (or its fragments) has been thought by others to be extracellular [23]. Because in IBM the authors have considered that Aβ toxicity is intracellular [1••], in 1998 Askanas and Engel [56] proposed a similar intracellular mechanism for AD. This is now also being considered by some of the AD researchers [57].

Acknowledgments

The authors' studies described in this review were supported in part by the National Institutes of Health (grants NS34103 and AG16768), the Muscular Dystrophy Association and Alzheimer Foundation, and the Helen Lewis, Sheldon Katz, and Ron Stever Research Funds. The authors are grateful to their research and clinical colleagues and staff for their participation in various aspects of these studies.

[1••,2••]. In s-IBM and PM there is a predominance of CD45 RO + memory T-cells in endomysial infiltrates [1••,2••]. The cause of the lymphocytic mononuclear-cell inflammation in s-IBM is unknown. Although the type of T-cell response suggests it is antigen

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. Possible interactions and consequences of amyloid-β precursor protein, amyloid-β, cholesterol, and caveolin-1 in inclusion-body myositis muscle fibers. Aβ-amyloid-β; AβPP-amyloid-β precursor protein; PHF-paired-helical filament.

••]. (The recent concept of a putative toxicity of small oligomeric aggregates of Aβ in AD [34••] could also apply intracellularly to IBM.) The authors' hypothesis concerning the pathogenic importance of AβPP and Aβ is supported by several studies. First, the experimental overexpression of AβPP through direct Aβ PP gene transfer into human normal, aneurally-cultured muscle fibers induced most of the basic aspects of the IBM phenotype, including vacuolation, intracellular congophilia, accumulation of Aβ in 6 to 10 nm fibrils, nuclear PHFs (cytoplasmic PHFs have not yet been observed) and abnormal mitochondria [1••]. Second, in h-IBM cultured muscle fibers, the genetically-determined AβPP overexpression preceded other IBM-like abnormalities

••]. apoE is prominently accumulated in IBM muscle fibers, colocalizing with Aβ and phosphorylated tau [1••]. apoE also colocalizes with the accumulated LDLR and VLDLR [44••],

