Inclusion-body myositis and myopathies: different etiologies, possibly similar pathogenic mechanisms

Purpose of review

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM) and hereditary inclusion body myopathies are progressive muscle diseases that lead to severe disability. We discuss recent advances in illuminating their pathogenic mechanism(s).

Recent findings

We emphasize how different etiologies might lead to the strikingly similar pathology and possibly similar pathogenic cascade. Our basic hypothesis is that over-expression of amyloid-b precursor protein within aging muscle fibers is an early upstream event causing the subsequent pathogenic cascade. On the basis of our research, several processes seem to be important in relation to the still speculative pathogenesis: (a) increased transcription and accumulation of amyloid-b precursor protein, and accumulation of its proteolytic fragment Ab; (b) accumulations of phosphorylated tau and other Alzheimer-related proteins; (c) accumulation of cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein receptors, the cholesterol accumulation possibly due to its abnormal trafficking; (d) oxidative stress; and (e) a milieu of muscle cellular aging in which these changes occur. We discuss unfolded and/or misfolded proteins as a possible mechanism in formation of the inclusion bodies and their consequences. The remarkable pathologic similarities between s-IBM muscle and Alzheimer disease brain are discussed. Summary Unfolding knowledge of the various pathogenetic aspects of the s-IBMs and hereditary inclusion body myopathies may lead to new therapeutic avenues.

Introduction

The term `inclusion body myositis' (IBM) was used to designate a subset of patients with chronic polymyositis whose muscle biopsies exhibited muscle ®bers containing vacuoles and characteristic ®lamentous inclusions within the cytoplasm and nuclei, in addition to in¯ammation [1]. Presently, sporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM) is recognized as the most common muscle disease that starts after age 50 years, and it leads to severe disability (clinical features are reviewed elsewhere [2,3,4 . ]). s-IBM is of unknown cause and uncon®rmed pathogenesis.

The s-IBM muscle ®ber molecular phenotype is remarkably similar to that of Alzheimer disease brain (for recent review [5 . . ,6 . ]). The similarities include accumulations of the following [5 . . ]: amyloid-b precursor protein (AbPP); amyloid-b; phosphorylated tau in the form of paired helical ®laments (PHFs); presenilin-1; and several other `Alzheimer-characteristic' proteins.

Traditionally, s-IBM has been considered an in¯ammatory myopathy, together with polymyositis and dermatomyositis, and several recent reviews [4 . ,7 . ,8] addressed the in¯ammatory aspects of these disorders. Although the in¯ammatory component of s-IBM muscle biopsies is undisputable, at least in the early stages, s-IBM patients as a group respond poorly to anti-dysimmune treatment, which is in contrast to patients with polymyositis and dermatomyositis [3,4 . ,7 . ]. Patients older than 50 years with what may be considered `pure' polymyositis are rare; virtually all older patients with lymphocytic myositis have s-IBM.

In s-IBM, we have proposed that the milieu of the aging muscle ®ber might: modify the provocation of, or response to, the lymphocytic in¯ammation (for review [5 . . ]); promote development of the IBM-characteristic progressive vacuolar degeneration; and promote the characteristic ectopic expression of several potentially toxic proteins, which may underlie disease progression. Another concept is that the lymphocytic in¯ammation might be a secondary component, occurring in response to `foreign' proteins that abnormally accumulate within and `foreignize' s-IBM muscle ®bers. This possibility is supported by the fact that in¯ammation, in addition to other abnormalities, is present in muscle of transgenic mice that over-express AbPP in muscle ®bers [9±11]. Moreover, lymphocytic in¯ammation can occur in several human genetic muscle diseases that are generally considered non-in¯ammatory, including dysferlin de®ciency [12], laminin-2 de®ciency [13], and facioscapular muscular dystrophy [14].

We introduced the term `hereditary inclusion body myopathies' (h-IBMs) in 1993 [15] in order to specify hereditary muscle diseases with pathologic features that strikingly resemble those of s-IBM except for a lack of lymphocytic in¯ammation, hence the term `myopathy' instead of `myositis'. (Only rarely do h-IBM patients have slight in¯ammation in their muscle biopsies [16] [Askanas V, Engel WK, unpublished data, 2000].) The h-IBMs encompass several autosomal-recessive and autosomal-dominant syndromes of progressive muscle weakness, with various clinical presentations (for recent review [17 . . ]).

Because the characteristic pathologic phenotype of h-IBM is now well de®ned, we consider all hereditary muscle diseases with muscle biopsies containing vacuoles and both types of the characteristic IBM-type inclusions (v.i.) to be forms of h-IBM. The h-IBMs can be grouped by their mode of inheritance and genetic mutation [17 . . ]. The imprecise term `distal myopathy' in relation to h-IBM syndromes is undesirable because it has included several syndromes with pathologic phenotypes that are different from that of h-IBM. Several muscle diseases previously designated distal myopathies are indeed h-IBMs, based on their morphologic phenotype and new genetic studies (v.i.).

Here we present our current concepts of the pathogenesis of s-IBM and the h-IBMs, together referred to as `the IBMs', including considerations regarding how different etiologies may lead to very similar pathogenic cascades. We raise a novel possibility that, among other factors, abnormal accumulation, aggregation and misfolding of proteins, combined with, and/or perhaps provoked by an aged intracellular milieu, lead to the IBM-speci®c vacuolar degeneration and muscle-®ber atrophy in both s-IBM and the h-IBMs.

Putative pathogenic mechanisms of sporadic and hereditary IBMs

Diagnostic criteria for muscle biopsies in patients with s-IBM and h-IBMs were recently reviewed [5 . . ,17 . . ]. s-IBM is probably a multifactorial disease. The direct causes are not known. Aging factors are probably an important pathogenic component. h-IBMs are multigenetic. Only in the autosomal-recessive quadricepssparing form and in one autosomal-dominant form (v.i.) have the respective abnormal genes been identi®ed. We have proposed that the concurrent increased expression of various proteins (most of which have been considered characteristic of Alzheimer disease brain; including presenilin-1, a-synuclein, proteins related to oxidative stress and several others, in addition to AbPP, amyloid-b and phosphorylated tau) is at least one common aspect underlying the pathogenesis of the IBMs [2,5 . . ,17 . . ].

However, despite their chemo-pathologic similarities, each disease category ± IBM and Alzheimer disease ± remains organ speci®c, involving postmitotic muscle ®bers or postmitotic neurons. The tissue affected in the sporadic forms, muscle versus brain, may be in¯uenced by an etiologic agent (a virus?), previous exposure to an environmental factor(s), or the patient's genetic background (the cellular microclimate). Cellular prion protein and its messenger RNA also accumulate in both s-IBM and h-IBM muscle ®bers, but not in Alzheimer disease brain [2,5 . . ].

In IBM muscle ®bers it is possible that a detrimental cascade might be started by one `IBM master gene' product (protein), which serves directly or indirectly as a transcription factor that activates genes for at least some of these `IBM proteins' [5 . . ], leading to the abnormal accumulation of proteins and their aggregation into the IBM-speci®c inclusion bodies (v.i.). A putative IBM master gene itself might be activated by a viral gene product in s-IBM or by a mutated gene in the h-IBMs. We also suggest that it might share features with a putative master gene that controls steady-state accumulation of certain proteins in the postsynaptic region of mature muscle ®bers, and transient accumulation in regenerating ®bers [5 . . ].

We previously postulated that, in s-IBM and the various h-IBMs, different etiologies lead to a common downstream pathogenic cascade, which ultimately is responsible for the characteristic muscle-®ber degeneration. This would be the same principle as in Alzheimer disease, in which at least ®ve different genes, and unknown factors for sporadic Alzheimer disease, lead to the same pathologic phenotype in the brain [18,19].

Specificity of the IBM phenotype

The unusual constellations of proteins that constitute the two types of muscle-®ber inclusion bodies are characteristic of s-IBM and h-IBM; in our experience they do not occur in either vacuolated or nonvacuolated ®bers of other muscle diseases. The only exception is oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy [20], which for this reason can be considered a form of h-IBM [17 . . ,21]. The occasional vacuoles and tubulo®laments reported in rare muscle ®bers in a few other muscle diseases, for example in myotonic dystrophy patients (and, if so, in older patients; Askanas V, Engel WK, unpublished data, 1998), are very sparse and probably not pathogenically signi®cant for those diseases.

Possible mechanisms governing formation of the inclusion bodies in IBM muscle

Several factors, or combination of factors, need to be considered.

Protein crowding, unfolding, and misfolding

On a given section of an IBM muscle biopsy, the inclusion bodies are present mainly in vacuole-free regions of the vacuolated muscle-®ber cytoplasm and in the cytoplasm of nonvacuolated ®bers. The vacuoles themselves contain membranous debris but usually do not contain the IBM-inclusions; we consider focal IBM vacuoles to represent an advanced stage of muscle-®ber destruction.

The `inclusion body' of IBM muscle was originally described ultrastructurally as a cluster of tubulo®laments of unknown molecular composition [1]. Subsequently, our cytochemical, immunocytochemical, and ultrastructural studies demonstrated two major types of intracellular inclusions in the IBMs [5 . . ]. By light microscopy, these inclusions are as follows [5 . . ]: the rounded, plaque-like inclusion body, which contains prominent amyloid-b (the `amyloid-b inclusion body'); and the various-sized, squiggly, linear inclusion body, which prominently contains phosphorylated tau (the `tau inclusion body'). Both types of inclusions contain several other accumulated proteins, some of which are present in each of them [2,5 . . ]. Both inclusion types are `amyloid'-positive, as evidenced by their reactivity with crystal violet, thio¯avin S and congo red, implying that they contain proteins in the b-pleated-sheet con®guration [5 . . ]. Ultrastructurally, amyloid-b-immunoreactive inclusions appear as aggregates of 6-to 10-nm diameter amyloid-like ®brils and amorphous material, whereas inclusions that contain phosphorylated tau appear as 15to 21-nm diameter PHFs or tubulo®laments, depending on tissue processing [2,5 . . ].

In general, more than 20 unrelated proteins, including amyloid-b, prion, tau and transthyretin, can abnormally unfold and self-aggregate to form b-pleated-sheet amyloid [22 . . ]. Although amyloid ®brils were previously considered to be cytotoxic, there is current experimental evidence [22 . . ,23,24 . . ] that pre-amyloid oligomeric complexes or aggregates, either diffuse or in a proto®bril stage, can be very cytotoxic.

Mechanisms responsible for formation of the multiprotein inclusions in IBM muscle are not understood, but unfolding and misfolding of proteins probably plays a role. In general, protein aggregation is considered to be caused by binding of partly unfolded or misfolded polypeptides induced by interaction among their inappropriately exposed hydrophobic surfaces [22 . . ,24 . . ]. Those interactions were recently shown to be highly speci®c [25]. Aggregates of improperly folded proteins are usually cytoplasmic and occasionally nuclear; correctly folded (normal) proteins are soluble, structural, or associated with cell membranes [24 . . ].

Unfolding or misfolding of proteins can occur in vivo and in vitro under several circumstances, including macromolecular crowding, oxidative stress, exposure to toxins, and `aging' [24 . . ]. Markers of oxidative stress are increased in IBM muscle [5 . . ], and this mechanism might contribute to abnormal folding or misfolding of IBM proteins. Variously mutated proteins have a strong propensity to unfold or misfold [24 . . ]. Aggregations of proteins into insoluble intracellular complexes and inclusion bodies have been proposed to be importantly related to several neurodegenerative disorders, including Alzheimer disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Huntington disease, and Parkinson's disease [24 . . ].

In the IBMs there is increased transcription of several genes, such as those that encode AbPP-751, cellular prion protein, enzymes that are involved in cellular defense against oxidative stress [2,5 . . ], and c-Jun (Broccolini A, Askanas V, unpublished data, 2000). There is also abnormal accumulation of RNA [26], ectopic expression of RNA polymerase II [27], and abnormalities in components of signal transduction [28,29]. All of these phenomena might contribute to abnormal accumulation and crowding of proteins, which could lead to their unfolding, abnormal glycosylation, and other deleterious consequences for the proteins and the muscle cell.

Our recent studies demonstrating the unfolded protein response in s-IBM [30] and h-IBM (Vattemi G, Askanas V, unpublished data, 2002) muscle are in accord with this proposal. The unfolded protein response, evidenced by increased expression of endoplasmic reticulum chaperone proteins (e.g. calnexin, calreticulin, BiP, GRP94, and ERP-72), all of which we found accumulated in s-IBM muscle ®bers [30] indicates endoplasmic reticulum stress and the presence of improperly folded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (for general review [31]). Several of the proteins that are abnormally accumulated in IBM muscle ®bers (e.g. amyloid-b, prion, phosphorylated tau, presenilin-1, a-synuclein and SOD1) have the propensity to unfold/misfold pathologically and thereby might contribute to the `endoplasmic reticulum stress' observed in the IBMs.

Muscle fiber aging

s-IBM typically becomes clinically manifest after age 50 years, and more often in the 60s and 70s. Among sporadic `in¯ammatory myopathy' patients, the speci®c degenerative accumulations of proteins, mRNAs, and cholesterol (see below) within muscle ®bers described here occur only in s-IBM, and not in polymyositis or dermatomyositis. However, they do occur in the h-IBMs, which typically lack the lymphocytic in¯ammatory component. We suggest that these accumulations are related to an aging-based degenerative pathogenic cascade. In the h-IBMs the causative gene abnormality exists from conception but does not produce clinically evident muscle damage until the second, third, or fourth decade of life. We postulate that a speci®c h-IBM genetic defect, combined with the adult `early aging' muscle-®ber milieu, leads to development of the h-IBM characteristic vacuolar degeneration.

In the cellular milieu of the aging muscle ®ber, there may be diminished homeostatic mechanisms caused either by under-expression of `youthful' genes that encode bene®cial cellular factors or by over-expression of yet-unknown `aging' genes that encode toxic cellular factors. For example, cellular aging has been shown to promote accumulation of abnormal proteins and to slow the degradation of normal and abnormal proteins [24 . . ]. The expanding knowledge of aging-related protein misfolding, binding, and aggregation may clarify mechanisms that are presumably relevant to the IBMs. Aging changes within muscle mitochondria [32] or elsewhere in the muscle ®ber may predispose to the mitochondrial abnormalities that have been documented in s-IBM and older h-IBM patients [5 . . ,6 . ], potentially provoking a vicious circle between mitochondrial malfunction and the oxidative stress evident in the ®ber.

A putative key pathogenic role for intracellular accumulation of amyloid-b precursor protein/amyloid-b in IBM muscle fibers

We have proposed a key upstream or mid-stream role for increased intracellular AbPP/amyloid-b in the pathogenesis of both s-IBM and the h-IBMs, suggesting that it causes abnormal signal transduction, modulation of other genes, induction of oxidative stress, mitochondrial mulfunction, and other abnormalities [5 . . ]. Our hypothesis is supported by our tissue-culture studies that showed the following. First, experimental over-expression of AbPP through direct AbPP gene transfer (via adenovirus vector) into normal human, rather mature, cultured muscle ®bers induced several aspects of the IBM pathologic phenotype, including vacuolation, intracellular congophilia, nuclear PHFs, and abnormal mitochondria [33,34]. Second, in cultured h-IBM muscle ®bers, an AbPP over-expression, presumably genetically determined, preceded other detectable IBM-like abnormalities [5 . . ]. Finally, in contrast to normal control cultured human muscle, cultured muscle ®bers overexpressing AbPP experimentally or genetically had abnormal neuromuscular junctions, and could not become innervated by co-cultured fetal rat spinal cord neurons [35]. Those last ®ndings led us to propose that, in IBM muscle, intracellular AbPP over-expression may be responsible for the postulated `myogenous denervation' [35] and for the recently reported abnormalities of neuromuscular junctions in IBM biopsies [5 . . ].

Additional support for our hypothesis of an intracellular toxicity of AbPP and amyloid-b in the IBM pathogenesis was provided by two transgenic mouse models that overexpressed AbPP within muscle ®bers [10,11]. Some aspects of human IBM pathology were produced, but only during aging of those mice.

In Alzheimer disease, the toxicity of amyloid-b (or its oligomers) was thought to be extracellular [36]. In IBM we have considered that amyloid-b toxicity is intracellular, and a few years ago we proposed a similar intracellular mechanism for Alzheimer's disease [37]. This is now also being considered by some Alzheimer's disease researchers [38,39].

Free cholesterol, lipoprotein receptors, and related mechanisms in relation to IBM pathogenesis

The low-density-lipoprotein receptor (LDL-R) gene superfamily encompasses several transplasmalemmal receptors, including LDL-R, very-low-density lipoprotein receptor (VLDL-R) and LDL-R-related protein [40,41]. In addition to binding and delivery of lipoproteins into cells [40,41], they can bind and internalize apolipoprotein E [40], in¯uence processing of AbPP and amyloid-b production in cell culture systems [38,42], and in¯uence tau phosphorylation. In IBM muscle ®bers, apolipoprotein E is accumulated and it colocalizes with amyloid-b, phosphorylated tau, LDL-R, and VLDL-R [43,44 . ].

Free cholesterol (indicated by ®lipin binding) is abnormally accumulated in s-IBM [44 . ] and h-IBM (Askanas V, Ke® M, unpublished data, 2002) muscle ®bers. It colocalizes with abnormally accumulated amyloid-b and phosphorylated tau, as well as with LDL-R and VLDL-R [44 . ]. Caveolin-1, a major protein of plasmalemmal microdomain caveolae, binds cholesterol. It is an intracellular transporter of cholesterol and in¯uences its intracellular traf®cking and homeostasis [45,46]. Caveolin-1 is accumulated in IBM muscle ®bers, where it colocalizes with both free cholesterol and amyloid-b [43]. Our studies therefore suggest that, within IBM muscle ®bers, traf®cking of cholesterol is perturbed, resulting in its demonstrated accumulation. Experimental loading with cholesterol increases amyloid-b production and amyloidogenesis in non-muscle cells [47,48]. We propose that within IBM muscle ®bers cholesterol, rather than being properly metabolized or cleared, is deposited ± in association with lipoprotein receptors, apolipoprotein E, and caveolin-1 ± at sites of amyloid-b accumulation and possibly at sites of AbPP processing, where it may adversely increase Ab production, misfolding, and aggregation.

Possible clues from newly discovered genetic defects

These genetic defects are providing new avenues to explore.

Mutations in the GNE gene

Missense mutations were recently identi®ed in the UDP-N-acetylglucosamine-2 epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase (GNE) gene in the quadriceps sparing h-IBM of Persian (Iranian) Jews and in a few other ethnic groups [49 . . ]. Other mutations in the same GNE gene were subsequently reported in Japanese h-IBM [50] (also called `distal myopathy with rimmed vacuoles'), supporting our previous contention that it is the same disease as quadriceps sparing h-IBM [18]. Identifying GNE as the mutated gene should now facilitate analysis of the pathogenic cascade in this and possibly other forms of h-IBM, as well as in s-IBM.

GNE is a bifunctional enzyme catalyzing the ®rst two steps in the synthesis of N-acetylneuraminic (sialic) acid [51±53]. GNE enzymatic activity modulates the structure of many protein complexes in virtually all organs [48,49 . . ,50]. GNE-dependent intrinsic synthesis of sialic acid occurs in the cytoplasm. Sialic acid is a terminal component of glycan structures bound to proteins and gangliosides that play important roles in various cellular processes [51±53]. Because of the important functions of sialic acid, any dysregulation of its biosynthesis and distribution could lead to severe abnormalities of glycoconjugate biosynthesis [54].

It will be important to determine why only skeletal muscle is involved in quadriceps-sparing h-IBM. Speculatively, h-IBM mutations may particularly in¯uence sialation/glycation of one or several important muscle proteins, and perhaps one that regulates other proteins. If some of the AbPP, amyloid-b, or tau protein molecules are abnormally glycated in h-IBM, and possibly in s-IBM, then this could cause their misfolding and be pathogenically important. Of possible relevance is that tau in Alzheimer's disease brain contains large amounts of truncated glycans, which may contribute to its pathologic assembly and stabilization in Alzheimer's disease PHFs [55].

Mutation in the myosin heavy chain IIa gene

In an autosomal-dominant Swedish h-IBM, a missense mutation (Glu-706?Lys) in the myosin heavy chain IIa gene has recently been reported [56]. In childhood and adolescence, the myopathy is mild and the patients have only minor morphologic abnormalities in their muscle biopsies. From ages 30 to 50 years, several patients developed progressive limb-muscle weakness and the h-IBM muscle histopathologic phenotype, consisting of vacuoles and SMI-31-positive tubulo®laments [56]. Recent identi®cation of myosin heavy chain IIa over-expression in the area of vacuoles led those investigators to propose that the mutant myosin heavy chain IIa protein may be directly associated with formation of the vacuoles [57], by a yet unknown mechanism.

The fact that signi®cant clinical weakness and the full IBM pathologic phenotype both developed after the age of 30 years is in accordance with our previously proposed relationship between aging and activation of the IBM pathogenesis.

Conclusion

Herein we presented the most recent ®ndings and approaches to the pathogenesis of s-IBM and the h-IBMs. These ®ndings have not yet provided a denouement of the cause or yielded an effective treatment, but they have elucidated various new and potentially exciting avenues to explore that could lead to long-term bene®t for IBM patients. In the autosomal-recessive h-IBM of Persian Jews (and some other groups) with mutation in the GNE gene, a relative sparing of the quadriceps is a remarkable feature. Learning the reason for this might lead to a medical treatment to convert susceptible muscles to be like the quadriceps muscle which, because of its speci®c cellular milieu, might be less dependent on the function of normal GNE or less susceptible to a function perturbed by mutated GNE. An understanding of the various cellular functions that are dependent on GNE in relation to the molecular/ biochemical disturbances we have demonstrated in h-IBM muscle could uncover steps that are susceptible to therapeutic intervention.

Another potential avenue for management of IBMs could be to detoxify free radicals or prevent their formation within muscle ®bers.

A few patients with s-IBM de®nitely bene®t, to some degree, from treatment with single-dose, alternate-day prednisone or intravenous immunoglobin G [3] (Engel WK, unpublished data, 2002). However, much better treatment modalities are certainly needed. In those patients who are responsive, the component being therapeutically regulated is not certain. It could be the mononuclear in¯ammatory cells in the muscle, the muscle ®ber degenerative changes, a dysimmune neuropathy, or a myogenous dysinnervation.

New avenues for therapeutic interventions in the IBMs might be provided by better understanding of the downstream steps of the pathogenic cascade that are induced by intramuscle ®ber overproduction of amyloidb and its toxic oligomers; the mechanisms of abnormal protein unfolding and misfolding, and their consequences for muscle cells; and the mechanisms and consequences of muscle ®ber aging.

Acknowledgements

Our studies described in the present review were supported in part by the National Institutes of Health (grants NS34103 and AG16768), the Muscular Dystrophy Association and Alzheimer Foundation, and the Helen Lewis, Sheldon Katz, and Ron Stever Research Funds. We are grateful to our research and clinical colleagues, and staff for their participation in various aspects of these studies.

References and recommended reading References and recommended reading

Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:

. of special interest 

