Inclusion body myositis

Inclusion body myositis (IBM) is an inflammatory myopathy with distinctive clinicopathologic features. The etiology of IBM remains elusive. The immune-mediated basis for this disease has been challenged by evidence implicating a number of divergent etiologic factors. These factors include mitochondrial deletions, nitric oxide induced oxidative stress, myonuclear breakdown, and abnormal accumulation within muscle fibers of brain-specific Alzheimer type proteins. The treatment of IBM with conventional immunosuppressive agents has been disappointing. Therapeutic approaches currently under study or consideration are ␤-interferon and synthetic anabolic hormones.

The term "inclusion body myositis" (IBM) was originally coined in 1971 [1]. IBM was initially thought to be a variant of polymyositis but numerous clinical and pathologic studies over the past thirty years have clearly defined IBM as a specific entity distinct from other idiopathic inflammatory myopathies. It is the most common acquired muscle disease occurring over the age of 50, with a prevalence estimated at 4-9:1,000,000; it affects men more frequently than women by a ratio of greater than 2:1 [2,3]. It is distinguishable from other idiopathic inflammatory myopathies by its insidious onset, distinctive pattern of distal and proximal muscle involvement, and distinctive histopathology. IBM is generally an acquired sporadic myopathy in which there is histologic evidence of inflammation. IBM myositis must be distinguished from the many inclusion body myopathies where inflammation is not seen [4]. The inclusion body myopathies include hereditary diseases; sporadic cases of inclusion body myopathy occur and are usually separable from IBM by histology and clinical features.

Clinical features

The average time from symptom onset to diagnosis in IBM is about 6 years [5]. The most frequent symptom is difficulty with ambulation and frequent falls due to buckling of knees caused by weakened knee extensors. Early involvement of the quadriceps and forearm flexor muscle compartment is typical for IBM in contrast to polymyositis and dermatomyositis where more proximal shoulder and hip girdle muscles are typically involved early on. Muscle atrophy, a reflection of the chronicity of this condition, is often striking with a scooped-out appearance of the medial aspect of the forearms and thin, atrophic quadriceps muscles (Fig. 1). The latter, when severe, impairs the individual's ability to ambulate safely and is the major source of disability in patients with IBM. Another notable feature is the frequent occurrence of swallowing dysfunction. Estimates of the prevalence of detectable swallowing dysfunction in IBM are as high as 60% but the incidence in the lifetime of affected individuals may be higher [6,7]. Nonetheless, inanition from dysphagia is infrequent.

Inclusion body myositis is associated with other connective tissue diseases in up to 15% of patients, although as many as 30% have detectable autoantibodies, roughly half of whom have myositis specific antibodies [8,9•]. Associated autoimmune diseases include systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), Sjogren syndrome, scleroderma, interstitial pneumonitis, psoriasis, and sarcoidosis. Until recently, IBM was not thought of as being associated with malignancies. However, a recent population-based study of inflammatory myopathies has challenged that notion by demonstrating an increased risk of malignancies in patients with IBM similar to that of polymyositis [10]. The data in this study were obtained from a pathology laboratory that identified cases of inflammatory myopathy and malignancy. Further confirmation of this finding is needed.

Knowledge of the natural history of IBM is based mostly on retrospective studies with small numbers of patients. A study of 18 affected individuals estimated the rate of decline in strength, based on hand held myometry at 1.4% per month [11]. Another retrospective analysis of 8 patients followed by manual muscle testing measured a mean decline of 17% over an average of 24.5 months or a decline of 0.7% per month [6]. A more recent prospective study of 11 patients demonstrated a 4% decline in 6 months (0.66% per month) in strength based on quantitative myometry using maximal isometric contraction testing [12•]. A similar rate of decline was also found in another study using manual muscle testing. A rate of decline of 17% over an average followup period of 24 months [0.7% per month] was observed [13]. The latter study also looked, retrospectively, at rates of functional decline in 78 patients. The study found that time from symptom onset to use of a walker varied dramatically depending on age at symptom onset. Whereas an average of 17 years elapsed from symptom onset to walker use in individuals with symptom onset at age 40-49, that time interval dropped to an average of 3.2 years for patients with onset at age 70-79 [12•]. Despite the differing methods and study designs, these natural history studies document a fairly consistent, slow rate of decline in most patients with IBM. However, it should be noted that apparent stabilization periods of 3-6 months will be evident in 25-50% of patients.

Diagnosis

The combination of insidious onset of muscle weakness in an individual over the age of 50 with the characteristic pattern of weakness described above should raise the suspicion of IBM. Serum CK is normal to five-fold elevated and electromyography typically demonstrates evidence of an active myopathic process. Ultimately, confirmation of the diagnosis depends on finding the typical pathologic findings on muscle biopsy. Muscle biopsy shows a combination of three characteristic features: (1) an inflammatory myopathy with predominantly endomysial inflammation and invasion of non-necrotic fibers;

(2) rimmed vacuoles; and (3) Intracellular amyloid deposits or the presence 15-18 nm tubofilamentous inclusions on electron microscopy (Fig. 2). Early in the course of the disease, only the inflammatory infiltrates may be evident and as such may be indistinguishable pathologically from other inflammatory myopathies. Consequently, published diagnostic criteria use a combination of clinical and pathologic criteria to arrive at the diagnosis IBM. Patients with all the pathologic features are classified as definite IBM and those with characteristic clinical features and inflammation but without the other pathologic signs are classified as possible IBM (Table 1) [13].

Pathophysiology

The etiology of IBM is unknown. A considerable body of evidence indicates that IBM is an immune-mediated disease. On a strictly clinical level, IBM is associated with a modest increase in other systemic autoimmune disorders, in addition to a substantial number with serologic evidence of immune activation. On muscle pathology, Engel et al. have demonstrated that the endomysial inflammatory infiltrates in IBM patients are composed predominantly of cytotoxic T cells and macrophages identical to the inflammatory profile of polymyositis, a disease that is clearly immune mediated [14]. Analysis of T cell receptors in infiltrating lymphocytes indicates a restricted pattern of gene rearrangements suggesting T cell activation by an as yet unidentified superantigen, not necessarily muscle specific [15][16][17]. This restricted pattern persists throughout the course of the disease and suggests that the primary antigenic stimulus continues to induce immune-mediated muscle disease years after the onset of symptoms [18]. Moreover, fibers with evidence for T cell cytotoxicity are significantly more common than fibers containing amyloid or vacuoles that are undergoing necrosis [19]. Countering the immunemediated hypothesis is the uniform lack of sustained response of IBM to intervention with immunosuppressive agents.

There has been increasing evidence that the inflammation seen in IBM may not be the primary trigger. The Typical "scooped out" appearance of the forearm in inclusion body myositis caused by selective atrophy of the forearm flexor compartment.

presence of typical IBM inclusions-minus the inflammation-in a group of familial myopathies (the hereditary inclusion body myopathies) initially suggested that there might be an important genetic component. Cases of IBM in identical twins support this possibility [20]. Mitochondrial gene deletions have been demonstrated in a number of sporadic cases [21,22]. However, there is no evidence that these changes are primary. Other evidence suggests that myonuclear breakdown could be the initiating event [23] but the cause of this breakdown is unknown and the sequence of events leading to the distinctive myofiber pathology is unclear.

An extensive series of investigations demonstrated abnormal accumulations of a group of Alzheimer proteins, including prion protein, beta amyloid protein, terminal epitopes of beta amyloid precursor protein, alpha-1antichymotrypsin, phosphorylated tau, apolipoprotein E, ubiquitin, and presenilin within the vacuolated muscle fibers of IBM cases. What leads to the deposition of these proteins in IBM is unclear, and whether these represent a primary or secondary change is uncertain [24][25][26][27]. There is also evidence implicating nitric oxide induced oxidative stress in IBM [28]. Yang et al. previously demonstrated that superoxide dismutase 1 and its gene  are overexpressed in the vacuolated muscle fibers of IBM. Subsequently they demonstrated both neuronal and inducible nitric oxide synthase (NOS) immunoreactivity within the vacuoles or in the vacuole-free cytoplasm of muscle fibers from IBM muscle biopsy specimens. This observation suggests that oxidative stress might have a role in the pathogenesis of IBM [28]. A more recent study by Banwell and Engel suggest the presence of other biologic stressors in IBM [29••]. They found evidence of overexpression of ␣B-crystallin in IBM, most notably in microscopically normal appearing fibers. ␣B-crystallin is a heat shock protein that is upregulated in response to a variety of cellular stresses. The presence of increased ␣B-crystallin in intact fibers suggests that this response, to an as yet undefined stressor, subsequently leads to the changes observed in IBM.

Treatment

Therapeutic approaches to IBM have concentrated on treating the underlying inflammatory response with either immunosuppressive and immunomodulating drugs. Uncontrolled trials with corticosteroids, cyclophosphamide, chlorambucil, azathioprine and cyclosporin, and methotrexate failed to show convincing evidence of benefit. An initial pilot study of IVIG in IBM showed encouraging results but a subsequent randomized controlled trial with IVIG was essentially negative [30]. The potential therapeutic benefit of IVIG has been recently revived with a report of four patients with IBM showing dramatic improvement of dysphagia following treatment with IVIG [31]. A different approach was recently tried in a pilot study of ␤-interferon in IBM. The rationale for the use of ␤-interferons is that they counteract the immunostimulatory effects of ␥-interferon, such as activation of cytotoxic T cells, secretion of lymphokines and upregulation of HLA molecules in many cells. In addition ␤-interferon inhibits lymphocyte migration and may inhibit T cell secretion of chemotactic chemokines that are strongly expressed in IBM muscle [32,33]. Currently, ␤interferon is only approved for the treatment of multiple sclerosis. The study was a prospective, doubleblind, placebo-controlled, 6 month trial of weekly IM injections of 30 µg of ␤-interferon-1a [34]. The drug was well tolerated but no beneficial trends were noted, though the study was not powered to detect efficacy [34]. Another trial, using a new therapeutic approach, tested the efficacy of oxandrolone, a synthetic anabolic steroid, in IBM. This 3 month, randomized, placebo-controlled, crossover study demonstrated a borderline significant improvement in overall strength, as measured by quantitative myometry [35]. The latter study was limited by a small sample size and a short duration of treatment. Further evaluation of oxandrolone is warranted, especially, as the authors suggest, because it may prove to be useful when combined with another disease modifying agent.

Despite these negative clinical trials, there continues to be case reports of patients with IBM responding to vari-ous immunosuppressive treatments [36]. Many treating physicians feel compelled to try prednisone when faced with the often dramatic degree of inflammation seen in the biopsies of many patients with IBM. A limited empiric trial of prednisone is justified in patients clinically suspected to have IBM but in whom the biopsy shows only inflammation without the other diagnostic findings of IBM. It is also intuitively reasonable to attempt more aggressive immunosuppressive therapy in IBM patients who have coexisting connective tissue diseases, though such an approach has not been carefully studied. In this situation, it is critical that one is not misled by the dramatic response of pain from the associated disease.

Weakness seldom improves and may be worsened by corticosteroids.

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. Forearm with inclusion body myositis.

Figure 2 .2Figure 2. Characteristic histopathologic changes in IBM.

Table 1 . IBM diagnostic criteria1Definite inclusion body myositisPatients must exhibit all muscle biopsy features including invasion of nonnecrotic fibers by mononuclear cells, vacuolated muscle fibers, and intracellular (within muscle fibers) amyloid deposits or 15-18 nm tubulofilaments. None of the other clinical or laboratory features are mandatory if muscle biopsy features are diagnostic.B. Probable inclusion body myositis If the muscle shows inflammation (invasion of non-necrotic muscle fibers by mononuclear cells) and vacuolated fibers but without other pathological features of inclusion body myositis, then a diagnosis of probable inclusion body myositis can be given if the patient exhibits theI. Diagnostic classificationA. characteristic clinical (A1,2,3) and laboratory (B1,3) features.II. Characteristic featuresA. Clinical features1. Duration of illness > 6 months2. Age of onset > 30 years of age3. Muscle weaknessMust affect proximal and distal muscles of arms and leg and Patient must exhibit at least one of the following features:a. Finger flexor weaknessb. Wrist flexor > wrist extensor weaknessc. Quadriceps muscle weakness (Ⅺ MRC grade 4)B. Laboratory features1. Serum creatine kinase < 12 times upper limit of normal2. Muscle biopsya. Inflammatory myopathy characterized by mononuclear cell invasion of nonnecrotic muscle fibersb. Vacuolated muscle fibersc. Either(I) Intracellular amyloid deposits (must use fluorescent method of identification before excluding the presence of amyloid) or (II) 15-18 nm tubulofilaments by electron microscopy 3. Electromyography must be consistent with features of an inflammatory myopathy (however, long-duration potentials are commonly observed and do not exclude diagnosis of sporadic inclusion body myositis).

