Inflammatory myopathies: Clinical, diagnostic and therapeutic aspects

The three major forms of immune-mediated inflammatory myopathy are dermatomyositis (DM), polymyositis (PM), and inclusion-body myositis (IBM). They each have distinctive clinical and histopathologic features that allow the clinician to reach a specific diagnosis in most cases. Magnetic resonance imaging is sometimes helpful, particularly if the diagnosis of IBM is suspected but has not been formally evaluated. Myositis-specific antibodies are not helpful diagnostically but may be of prognostic value; most antibodies have low sensitivity. Muscle biopsy is mandatory to confirm the diagnosis of an inflammatory myopathy and to allow unusual varieties such as eosinophilic, granulomatous, and parasitic myositis, and macrophagic myofasciitis, to be recognized. The treatment of the inflammatory myopathies remains largely empirical and relies upon the use of corticosteroids, immunosuppressive agents, and intravenous immunoglobulin, all of which have nonselective effects on the immune system. Further controlled clinical trials are required to evaluate the relative efficacy of the available therapeutic modalities particularly in combinations, and of newer immunosuppressive agents (mycophenolate mofetil and tacrolimus) and cytokine-based therapies for the treatment of resistant cases of DM, PM, and IBM. Improved understanding of the molecular mechanisms of muscle injury in the inflammatory myopathies should lead to the development of more specific forms of immunotherapy for these conditions.

PATHOGENESIS

Concepts of the pathogenic processes involved in the inflammatory myopathies have received considerable impetus from recent studies of their molecular immunology, immunohistochemistry, and immunogenetics. 10,88,115,224 These have further emphasized the role of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) and other genetic factors, 224 and have provided new insights into the humoral and cellular immune effector mechanisms including the role of cytokines, chemokines, and cell adhesion molecules, thereby identifying new potential therapeutic targets. In each of these conditions, inflammatory and immune mechanisms seem to play a role and each is characterized by T-cell and macrophage infiltrates (see below).

Although autoimmune responses are believed to be operative in at least DM and PM, target antigens have not been identified. In DM it has been established that the humoral immune process is directed against the vascular endothelium, with deposition of the C5b-9 membrane attack complex of complement, and leads to depletion of the endomysial capillary bed and ischemic muscle injury. 69,115,170 However, neither the putative endothelial cell antibodies nor the autoantigens with which they interact have been characterized. A role for antibodies to the Mi antigen has not been defined and this autoantibody is not present in most patients with DM. 84 Although intimate interaction between T-cells and muscle fibers has not been demonstrated in DM, close interaction between CD8 ϩ T-cells and nonnecrotic fibers has been consistently demonstrated in PM and IBM 7,115 and intracellular polarization of perforin toward affected muscle fibers has been demonstrated in these invading T-cells. 95 No specific T-cellreactive autoantigen has been defined in either disease and there is a paucity of evidence to support a role for the antigens recognized by the autoantibodies characteristic of PM (see below). In PM, restricted T-cell receptor V gene usage by invading T-cells suggests an antigen-specific reaction. 54,115 In IBM, there is some debate as to whether the T-cell infiltrate represents a true antigen-driven autoimmune reaction 10,81,193 although some recent data suggest limited T-cell receptor heterogeneity among muscle-invading T-cells. 24 In PM, DM, and IBM, there is a great deal of evidence to suggest that T-cell products are involved in the pathogenic process. Expression of cytokines such as interleukin (IL)-1(␣ and ␤), IL-6, interferon-␥, lymphotoxin, and tumor necrosis factor-␣ (TNF-␣) has been demonstrated in mononuclear cells in affected muscles in each disease group. 134,135,143,168 Collectively, these cytokines have a variety of functions that can contribute to local inflammatory responses and the generation or perpetuation of autoimmune responses and may act synergistically to damage muscle cells. 124 These functions include Tcell activation, recruitment of lymphocytes and mononuclear phagocytes, stimulation of expression of MHC molecules on a variety of cell types, and direct damage to target cells. Furthermore, a variety of chemotactic and inflammatory chemokines has been demonstrated in affected muscle in inflammatory muscle diseases. These include IL-8, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), regulated-uponactivation normal T-cell expressed and secreted (RANTES), and macrophage inflammatory protein-1␣ (MIP-1␣). 1,44,139,143 In many studies, expression of a range of cytokines that might serve to inhibit inflammation (e.g., transforming growth factor-␤, IL-10, IL-4) has also been described. 143,168 Presumably, in these diseases, the balance is in favor of the continued inflammatory response. Therapy aimed at inhibiting proinflammatory cytokine expression (or effect) or enhancing inhibitory cytokines may be of value in these diseases.

Expression of the cytokines and chemokines mentioned above has been well-documented in mononuclear cells, but other cells within muscle also seem to contribute to their expression and presumably exacerbate the inflammatory reaction. Thus, muscle cells can express IL-6, TNF-␣, IL-15, and the chemokines MCP-1 and RANTES. 19,20,63,75,82,183,231 Furthermore, endothelial cells can also express IL-1␣ and this has been demonstrated in blood vessels in idiopathic inflammatory myopathies. 145 The expression of these proinflammatory cytokines may be upregulated by the action of mononuclear cellderived cytokines and thus contribute further to the inflammatory response.

A further consequence of this cytokine expression in muscle is the upregulation of cell surface antigens that contribute to T-cell emigration into muscle, T-cell adherence, and T-cell activation. Expression of adhesion molecules such as intercellular adhesion molecule-1 on endothelial cells and muscle fibers, MHC class I and class II antigens on muscle fibers and activated T-cells, and CD40 on muscle fibers has been demonstrated. 62,115,123,231 CD40 interaction with CD40 ligand on T-cells can result in upregulation of inflammatory cytokine and chemokine expression by muscle cells. 231 Muscle cells have also been shown to express a BB1-like costimulatory molecule which is more prominent in inflammatory myopathies. 22 Myoblasts at least can present antigen to T-cells 86 so the expression of such costimulatory molecules in the presence of MHC antigens may facilitate antigen-specific T-cell activation by muscle cells. Fas expression by muscle cells, along with Fas ligand on infiltrating T-cells and macrophages, has been demonstrated in IBM and PM, 21 although evidence for apoptotic activity in muscle fibers is less clear. 21,115 In sporadic IBM, the nature of the T-cell response remains unclear. 10,18 Intimate interaction between CD8, DR positive (i.e., activated) T-cells which express perforin and granzyme, has been shown, 115 but evidence of antigen-specific autoimmunity is scarce. Deposition of the A␤ fragment of the amyloid precursor protein is a feature of affected muscle in IBM (see below) and it has been shown that muscle cells can secrete A␤. 10 Interaction of A␤ with muscle cells in turn can stimulate IL-6 production by these cells, 19 and its interaction with macrophages can induce TNF-␣ and IL-1 secretion. 165 Thus A␤ may contribute to a positive feedback loop that exacerbates inflammation in affected muscle. The stimulus for excessive A␤ production in IBM is unknown, and whether this precedes inflammation, or vice versa, remains to be determined. 10 

CLINICAL ASPECTS

Epidemiology. There are differences in the age and gender distribution of the three major forms of inflammatory myopathy. 156 Dermatomyositis may occur in childhood or adult life, whereas PM is rare in childhood and occurs mainly after the second decade of life. Both conditions are more common in females, whereas IBM is more common in males and occurs mainly over the age of 50 years. 50,205,227 Reported overall incidence rates for the autoimmune inflammatory myopathies have varied from 2.18 to 7.7 per million and prevalence rates from 10 to 63 per million in different studies. 45,190,199 There is little data on the relative incidence of the different forms of inflammatory myopathy and few studies have distinguished between PM and IBM. The prevalence of IBM has recently been reported to be 9.3 per million in Western Australia, with an age-adjusted prevalence of 35.3 per million over the age of 50 years. 205 A prevalence of 4.3 per million has been reported in the Netherlands, but the authors of this study considered that this figure was probably an underestimate related to incomplete ascertainment. 13 Genetics. A number of observations indicate that genetic factors play a part in the development of the inflammatory myopathies. 83,224 The first is the occurrence of various forms of inflammatory myopathy, including DM, PM, IBM, and orbital myositis, in more than one member of the same family, and reports of DM and IBM in twins (see review by Shamim et al. 224 ). In addition, a higher incidence of other autoimmune disorders has been reported in the first-degree relatives of patients with inflammatory myopathies. 93,244 It is likely that multiple genes contribute to susceptibility. The strongest link is with human leukocyte antigen (HLA) genes, in particular DRB1*0301 and the linked allele DQA1*0501, which have been associated with each of the major forms of idiopathic inflammatory myopathy, including sporadic cases of IBM but not hereditary inclusion body myositis. 127 One of the strongest associations reported is that between sporadic IBM and the ancestral haplotype marked by DR3 and C4A*Q0, pointing to a susceptibility locus within the MHC close to the class II region. 85,88,128 DR4 has been associated with d-penicillamine-induced myositis. 33 Within PM and DM, even stronger HLA associations with myositis-specific autoantibodies have been described, as is reviewed elsewhere. 84,116 In Caucasians, DR3 is strongly associated with antibodies to Jo-1 (see below), whereas the presence of antibodies to Mi-2 in DM has been associated with an MHC haplotype marked by DR7/DR53/DQA1*0201. Further, the presence of a tryptophan at amino acid 9 of the DR␤ chain is even more strongly associated with antibodies to Mi-2, suggesting a role for this amino acid in epitope presentation. 171 Other, less clear, associations between HLA genes and autoantibodies in inflammatory myopathy have been reported in other races. 84 Genetic polymorphisms at other loci, such as those encoding TNF-␣ and interleukin-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra), have been shown to be possible risk factors for juvenile inflammatory myopathy. 224 The TNF-␣ association may be a consequence of linkage dysequilibrium in the MHC and may thus reflect the DR3 association. Alternatively, the increased potential to produce TNF-␣, which has been associated with the TNF-308A variant, may contribute to disease pathogenesis. 197 Apolipoprotein ⑀4 and variants in the mtDNA D-loop region have been associated with sporadic IBM, 87,129 but genetic variations in the amyloid precursor protein and prion protein genes have been excluded. 84,195 The quadriceps-sparing form of hereditary inclusion body myopathy has recently been shown to be associated with mutations in the UDP-N-acetyl glucosamine 2-epimerase/N acetyl mannosamine kinase (GNE) gene 67 but preliminary findings suggest that the gene is not involved in the pathogenesis of sporadic IBM (Z. Argov, personal communication).

Clinical Manifestations. The clinical features of the inflammatory myopathies have been described in previous reviews. 4,50,71,155 The onset is usually more acute and the rate of progression more rapid in DM than in PM. It is slowest in IBM, in which muscle weakness develops insidiously and the diagnosis may not be made for several years. 205 Myalgias and muscle tenderness sometimes occur, particularly in cases of DM or overlap syndromes, and are also a feature of some forms of eosinophilic myositis and fasciitis, and of the recently described condition of macrophagic myofasciitis. 91 Although diffuse, the weakness in DM and PM is usually more severe in the shoulder and pelvic girdle muscles. Weakness of the neck flexors is common, but in some cases there is also severe weakness of the neck extensors resulting in difficulty in holding the head up ("dropped head"; Fig. 1A). In our experience, this has been encountered particularly in patients with myositis associated with scleroderma or mixed connective tissue disease (Fig. 1A). Dysphagia due to involvement of the pharyngeal and esophageal muscles is also common, especially in IBM. 118,251 Laryngeal involvement may occur in DM but is rare. Weakness of the respiratory muscles develops in some cases of severe PM or DM and, when severe, may necessitate assisted ventilation. 223 In DM and PM, the pattern of muscle weakness is nonselective. By contrast, in IBM weakness and atrophy are first observed in the quadriceps femoris muscles in the lower limbs, leading to a propensity to falls that may be the presenting symptom, and in the forearm flexor muscles in the upper limbs; the findings are often asymmetric. 6,206 Early involvement of the flexor digitorum profundus muscles leads to a characteristic inability to maintain flexion of the distal phalanges when the patient is asked to grip the examiner's fingers. As the disease progresses, there is also involvement of the flexor digitorum sublimis and finger extensors, and a "swan-neck" deformity of the fingers and hyperextension of the thumb may develop (Fig. 1B-D). In addition, there is also increasing involvement of more proximal muscle groups in the upper limbs and of other muscle groups in the lower limbs. The clinical phenotype is variable and, in some patients with IBM, there is a more proximal pattern of muscle involvement in both the upper and lower limbs from the outset, or purely upper or lower limb involvement. 137,163,206 Extramuscular Manifestations. The characteristic skin rash of DM on the upper eyelids (heliotrope rash) and face, knuckles (Gottron's sign), elbows, neck, upper chest and shoulders (shawl sign) is vir- tually diagnostic of the condition and may precede the muscle weakness (Fig. 2). 32 In some patients, the rash is the dominant feature and weakness may be minor or absent (amyopathic dermatomyositis), although evidence of myositis may be found if electromyography and muscle biopsy are performed. 198 Conversely, in some patients with DM, the skin changes are absent or inconspicuous at the time of presentation of the myopathy. Subcutaneous calcinosis occurs particularly in juvenile DM, but occasionally also in adult cases, and takes the form of nodules or plaques of calcification over the elbows, forearms, knuckles, axillae, or buttocks which may be painful and may ulcerate through the skin and become infected (Figs. 1E, 2E and F). The association of scleromyxedema with inflammatory myopathy is uncommon and carries a poor prognosis in our experience. 103 Thickening and induration of the skin of the extremities occurs in some forms of eosinophilic myositis such as the eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome, and Shulman's syndrome in which fasciitis is a prominent feature.

Involvement of other organs is more common in some subgroups of patients with inflammatory myopathy. For example, angiopathy involving the gastrointestinal tract, and at times other organs, is a serious complication of juvenile DM and may also occur in adult cases. 15 Arthralgias and synovitis of small or large joints may occur in patients with DM or PM, even without an associated connective tissue disease. A deforming arthropathy of the proximal and distal interphalangeal joints occurs typically in patients with inflammatory myopathy and antisynthetase antibodies. 151 Interstitial lung disease is also more likely to develop in DM or PM patients with anti-Jo-1 or other antisynthetase antibodies 97,152,237 and antiendothelial cell antibodies, 61 and in those with myositis associated with a connective tissue disease, and adversely affects the prognosis in such cases. 114 Cardiac involvement, including myocarditis, pericarditis, arrhythmias, congestive cardiac failure, and an increased incidence of electrocardiographic abnormalities is well documented in PM and DM, but symptomatic involvement is rare. 64 Associated Conditions. Overlap Syndromes. The reported frequency of other connective tissue diseases in patients with PM or DM has varied from 11-40% in different series. 6,79,130 The association is most frequent with scleroderma 43,166 and mixed connective tissue disease, 225 and is rare in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid disease, and Sjo ¨gren's syndrome. 215,255 Symptomatic myopathy resulting in proximal limb and neck muscle weakness has been reported to develop in up to 17% of patients with established scleroderma. 78,255 More common is the occurrence of PM or DM in patients with other associated features such as acrosclerosis, Raynaud's phenomenon, and arthropathy ("scleroderma-myositis" overlap). A high proportion of such patients are positive for the PM-Scl antinucleolar antibody and carry the HLA-DQA1*0501 and DRB1*0301 allelic markers. 104,191 Malignant Disease. The increased risk of malignancy in patients with DM was confirmed in casecontrol studies and meta-analyses, 113,252,253 and was found to be greatest in patients over the age of 50 years. 3,200 These studies showed that the period of increased risk included the 4 years prior to diagnosis of DM as well as the 4 years following diagnosis, particularly the 1st year, and also applied to cases with skin involvement alone. 247 By contrast, in PM, an increase was found only for the 1-5-year period after diagnosis of the myositis, which may have been due to increased surveillance and detection. 253 These findings were confirmed in a recent population-based Australian study that found a sixfold increase in the risk of malignancy in DM and a twofold increase in PM, the risk diminishing progressively FIGURE 3. Proposed algorithm for treatment of polymyositis and dermatomyositis, modified from Mastaglia et al. 161 with permission. AZA, azathioprine; CK, creatine kinase; IVIg, intravenous immunoglobulin; IVMP, intravenous methylprednisolone; MTX, methotrexate.

during the 5-year period after diagnosis. 29 Age over 45 years and male gender were found to be independent predictors of malignancy in a recent Asian study. 35 The spectrum of malignancies associated with DM is similar to that in the general population, with breast and ovarian cancer being most common in females, and lung and gastrointestinal cancer in males. 17,29,246 An association with nasopharyngeal cancer has been reported in Asian patients with DM. 35,202 Retroviral Infections. About one-third of patients with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection develop a myopathy. 52 This may be clinically and histologically indistinguishable from polymyositis. In some cases, inflammatory changes are inconspicuous and rod-bodies or cytoplasmic bodies are prominent in the muscle biopsy. The myopathy is characterized by the subacute onset of myalgia and proximal muscle weakness, and needs to be distinguished from the mitochondrial myopathy that may occur in patients treated with zidovudine. In addition, patients with immunodeficiency may develop various opportunistic muscle infections, and a progressive muscle wasting syndrome commonly occurs in patients with advanced disease.

Polymyositis may also occur in patients infected with the human T-cell lymphotropic virus (HTLV-1), either alone or in combination with a myelopathy (tropical spastic paraparesis). A high prevalence of HTLV-1-associated PM has been reported in Jamaicans 177 and also occurs in other parts of the world such as Japan and the United States. 51 Inclusion-body myositis has also been reported in association with HIV and HTLV-1 infection. 48 Drug-Induced Myositis. A number of drugs have been associated with the development of an inflammatory myopathy, and in particular DM. However, drug-induced myositis accounts for only a small proportion of cases of inflammatory myopathy. The drugs that have been implicated include D-penicillamine, 33 quinidine and procainamide, 131 and some nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents (e.g., niflumic acid). 100 Several of the 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG CoA) reductase inhibitor group of hypocholesterolemic agents are known to cause a noninflammatory necrotizing myopathy 8,125,239 but there are also some reports of an inflammatory myopathy developing in patients treated with simvastatin. 9,94 Polymyositis has been reported in some patients treated with interferon-␣ 182 and interleukin-2. 77 Contaminated preparations of l-tryptophan were implicated in the outbreak of the eosinophiliamyalgia syndrome in the early 1990s. 23 Other Varieties. Eosinophilic Myositis. An eosinophilic form of myositis which is clinically indistinguishable from the usual form of polymyositis may rarely occur. 132 In some cases, the myositis is part of a systemic hypereosinophilic syndrome in which anemia, skin changes, cardiac and pulmonary involvement, and peripheral and central nervous system involvement may also occur. 132,209 Other rare forms of eosinophilic myositis include eosinophilic fasciitis (Shulman's syndrome), 226 eosinophilic perimyositis, and the eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome, 112 which are characterized by widespread muscle pain and stiffness, and associated skin thickening and induration. 209 Granulomatous Myositis. Granulomatous myopathy is rare. It is usually associated with systemic sarcoidosis but sometimes occurs in isolation 179,210 and has also been reported in association with IBM. 60 Granulomatous myopathy may also occur in patients with thymoma, when it may be associated with myasthenia gravis, myocarditis, thyroiditis, pancytopenia, and biliary cirrhosis. 111,185 Other conditions that may be associated with granulomatous myopathy include Wegener's granulomatosis, 65 rheumatoid disease, 111 and Crohn's disease. 169 Infectious causes of granulomatous myositis, such as tuberculosis and fungal infections, should always be considered and excluded by appropriate biopsy staining procedures and serological studies.

Macrophagic Myofasciitis. A form of inflammatory myopathy characterized by myalgias, arthralgias, fever, weakness,increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and endomysial and perimysial infiltration with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive macrophages and lymphocytes has recently been described with more than 130 cases in France and certain other countries. 38,91 Macrophage inclusions have now been identified as deposits of aluminum hydroxide and the condition has been linked to the administration of aluminum hydroxide-containing vaccines. 92 Pipestem Capillary Disease. This is a distinctive form of inflammatory necrotizing myopathy associated with marked hyalinization and thickening of capillary walls, capillary loss, and microvascular deposition of complement membrane-attack complex. 70 Its nosological place remains uncertain, but a link to DM has been postulated and an association with malignancy has been reported in one case. 12,70 DIAGNOSTIC ASSESSMENT Confirmation of Diagnosis. The definitive diagnosis of an inflammatory myopathy requires a muscle biopsy. In some instances, however, the diagnosis can be made on clinical grounds, for example when the typical skin changes of DM are present, or can be suspected if the characteristic pattern of muscle involvement of IBM is found. The serum creatine kinase (CK) activity is usually elevated in patients with active disease, but the serum CK level may be normal or only mildly elevated particularly in DM, IBM, and in focal or interstitial forms of myositis.

Electromyography (EMG) allows confirmation of a myopathic process with the presence of early-recruiting motor unit potentials of low amplitude and short duration in the limb and paraspinal muscles, and will often also show prominent spontaneous muscle fiber potentials in patients with active myositis. However, the changes may be patchy and are nonspecific. In IBM, there may be both myopathic and neuropathic features, with some motor unit potentials of long duration, which may lead to a mistaken diagnosis of a neurogenic disorder such as motor neuron disease. 49 Nerve conduction studies show evidence of a coexisting peripheral neuropathy in some cases. 107,122,136 However, quantitative and macro-EMG studies have failed to confirm that there is a neurogenic component in most cases of IBM. 16,141 When the muscle biopsy is normal or shows only minor nonspecific changes, the diagnosis of inflammatory myopathy is problematic and greater emphasis then needs to be placed on clinical criteria and the results of other laboratory investigations. A number of attempts have been made to develop sets of diagnostic criteria for the inflammatory myopathies, taking into account clinical and pathological criteria as well the presence of myositis-specific autoantibodies and immunogenetic markers. 25,140,167,234,236 The best known of these are the Bohan and Peter criteria, which were developed for PM and DM but did not include IBM. More specific diagnostic criteria for DM, PM, and IBM have recently been proposed. 156 Muscle Imaging. It has been suggested that magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or computerized tomographic (CT) scanning may be helpful in confirming the diagnosis of an inflammatory myopathy and determining its type, and in selecting an appropriate biopsy site. 198 However, the diagnostic sensitivity of these imaging techniques has not been evaluated. The results of such studies may also be helpful and may guide therapeutic decisions when a biopsy is not possible or the biopsy findings are inconclusive. 80,213 Although CT scanning is more sensitive for displaying subcutaneous or fascial calcification in DM, MRI is the modality of choice for detecting active myositis and recognizing selective patterns of muscle involvement in IBM. 206 The characteristic finding in patients with active PM or DM consists of a multifocal or diffuse pattern of high signal intensity on T2-weighted fat-suppressive (STIR) or nonfat-saturated sequences, which is more marked in proximal limb muscles. 80,213,214 Such changes may also be found in patients with amyopathic DM. 230 With increasing disease duration, there is muscle atrophy and increased signal intensity on both T1and T2-weighted images, reflecting an increased adipose tissue content of the muscle. In IBM, there is, characteristically, selective involvement of the quadriceps femoris muscles in the thighs with relative sparing of the rectus femoris, and involvement of the medial gastrocnemius muscles and forearm flexor muscles. 206,222 We have found this pattern of muscle involvement useful in supporting the diagnosis in patients with atypical clinical features or inconclusive muscle biopsy findings.

Muscle Biopsy. Muscle biopsy is the definitive diagnostic procedure and, when possible, should be performed before commencement of treatment. The biopsy will not only allow confirmation of the diagnosis of an inflammatory myopathy but will also provide some indication of the severity and type of myositis and allow recognition of rarer forms such as eosinophilic, granulomatous, or parasitic myositis. An open biopsy from the vastus lateralis, biceps brachii, or deltoid muscle is preferable to a needle biopsy as it provides a larger tissue sample and reduces the likelihood of sampling error. However, because of the patchy nature of the histological changes, the biopsy may be normal or inconclusive, particularly in DM. 196 In some patients with the clinical features of IBM, the initial biopsy does not show the characteristic rimmed vacuoles and a diagnosis of possible IBM only will be made. 99 Muscle MRI and isotope scintigraphy have been suggested as ways of selecting a biopsy site and reducing the problem of sampling error, but the value of these techniques has not been formally evaluated. 144 A semi-open technique using a conchotome has also been advocated and is more suitable if it is planned to perform repeat biopsies to assess disease activity in clinical trials. 144 The biopsy should not be taken from a muscle that is severely atrophic, or from a muscle on which needle electromyography has been performed previously as it may show changes of a "needle myopathy." Tissue should be obtained not only for conventional light microscopic examination but also for immunohistochemical studies (e.g., for T-cell sub-sets; HLA Class 1 antigen expression; amyloid deposition, ubiquitin, and SMI-31 immunoreactivity in IBM) and for electron microscopy which is necessary to identify the tubuloreticular endothelial cell inclusions of DM 15 and the characteristic tubulofilamentous inclusions of IBM. 11,149 Autoantibodies. Antibodies to nuclear or cytoplasmic constituents have been reported in patients with inflammatory myopathies. These are classified as myositis-specific (i.e., occurring only in patients with inflammatory myopathies), or myositis-associated (i.e., found in patients with inflammatory myopathy as well as other connective tissue diseases). 28,84,235 The most common autoantibodies in PM are the antisynthetases directed against various aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, which have the potential to interfere with the protein synthetic mechanism in muscle fibers. The best known is anti-Jo-1 (anti-histidyl tRNA synthetase), which is strongly associated with the DR3, DRw52, and DQA1*0501 HLA haplotype. Anti-Jo-1 has a high specificity for the antisynthetase syndrome in which myositis is associated with interstitial lung disease, arthritis, Raynaud's phenomenon, and "mechanic's hands." 173 Anti-Jo-1 antibody has also been associated with perimysial inflammatory changes and fragmentation in the muscle biopsy. 180 Antibodies to the signal recognition particle (SRP) have been associated with severe, acute-onset PM responding poorly to treatment. Antibodies to the Mi-2 antigen are highly specific for DM and are present in high titers in up to 35% of cases, including some cases of juvenile DM. 84 With the possible exception of anti-Jo-1, none of the other antibodies have been found to have a sufficient degree of specificity or sensitivity to be of diagnostic or prognostic value, or to be useful for predicting responsiveness to treatment or monitoring disease activity.

Antibodies to the PM-Scl nucleolar antigen complex (originally referred to as anti-PM-1) have been reported in a high proportion of white patients with the scleroderma-myositis overlap. Almost 50% of patients with the antibody have this overlap syndrome but some have PM or scleroderma alone. 104,191 The anti-Ku antibody has a high specificity, but low sensitivity, for the scleroderma-myositis overlap syndrome in Japanese patients. 175 High titers of antibodies to nuclear ribonucleoprotein (nRNP) are a diagnostic marker for mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD) in which there is an overlap between features of scleroderma, polymyositis, SLE, and rheumatoid arthritis. 84 Antiproteasomal antibodies are found in a high proportion of patients with autoimmune myositis, SLE, and Sjo ¨gren's syndrome, and their titer has been found to correlate with disease activity. 76 Antiendothelial cell antibodies are found in DM and in other types of inflammatory myopathy, and in one study were found to be markers for the presence of interstitial lung disease. 61 Other non-disease-specific antibodies have been reported in patients with IBM, but myositis-specific antibodies such as anti-Jo-1 are only rarely found in this condition. 108,126 A high incidence of monoclonal gammopathies has been found in some series of IBM cases. 57 Screening for Malignancy. Adult patients with DM, and in particular those over the age of 50 years, should be thoroughly screened for the presence of an occult malignancy at the time of presentation and should be reassessed annually thereafter, or if there is a recrudescence of the DM while on treatment. Although the risk of an associated malignancy is lower in patients with PM, a similar approach is prudent in this group of patients. Screening investigations should include mammography, gynecological examination, and pelvic ultrasound in women, prostatic studies in men, and chest radiography in all cases. The need for additional investigations such as abdominal CT and endoscopic studies should be guided by the clinical assessment of the patient and whether there is any racial or genetic predisposition to a particular form of malignancy. For example, nasopharyngeal examination should be performed in Asian patients with DM, who have a higher risk of developing nasopharyngeal cancer. In patients with dysphagia, the possibility of an esophageal malignancy should always be considered and endoscopic and videofluoroscopic studies should be requested if there is any doubt that the dysphagia is due to the myositis.

TREATMENT

The treatment of the immune-mediated inflammatory myopathies is still largely empirical as there is only limited data from controlled clinical trials to allow an evidence-based approach. 41,154,189,242 Treatment has traditionally relied upon the use of corticosteroids and immunosuppressive agents, whose actions on the immune system are largely nonselective, and more recently on other forms of immunomodulatory therapy such as intravenous immunoglobulin. 53 Recent experimental approaches which hold promise for the treatment of resistant cases include cytokine-directed therapies and the use of monoclonal antibodies targeting B-cells and T-cells involved in the immune response. More specific immunother-apy awaits a better understanding of the effector mechanisms and the identification of the target antigens against which the immune response is directed.

Polymyositis and Dermatomyositis. Corticosteroids.

Although they have never been evaluated in controlled clinical trials, corticosteroids remain the firstline therapy of choice for the treatment of both PM and DM, and their efficacy is well-established in clinical practice. In retrospective studies, 60 -70% of patients were found to respond to treatment and to achieve a complete or worthwhile remission. 26,109,110,216,233 It is important that the initial treatment regimen should be individualized in each patient, taking into account the duration and severity of the disease, associated prognostic factors and other disorders, as well as risk factors for adverse drug effects. In most cases, we recommend starting with oral prednisone (or prednisolone) in a daily dose of ϳ1 mg/kg. This should be continued for a period of 4 -6 weeks before tapering by 5-10 mg/ week, and conversion to an alternate-day regimen can reduce the risk of adrenal suppression and other steroid side effects, including steroid myopathy (Fig. 3). 158,256 The rate of tapering should not be too rapid and should also be individualized, taking into account the rate of clinical improvement and concern about side effects. Higher initial doses of prednisone and more prolonged periods of high-dose administration should be avoided as serious side effects are more likely to develop and may adversely affect the outcome in our experience.

It is preferable in some patients, and particularly those with severe myositis or in whom diagnosis was unduly delayed, to commence treatment with prednisone in combination with a steroid-sparing agent such as methotrexate or azathioprine. Combined therapy has been shown to be associated with a lower relapse rate 162,176 and a better long-term outcome. 30,31 The risk of disturbing diabetic control or of aggravating postmenopausal osteoporosis can be reduced by using a lower starting dose of prednisone (ϳ0.5 mg/kg/day) in combination with methotrexate or azathioprine. A retrospective review showed a similar outcome in patients treated with high (Ͼ0.5 mg/kg) and low daily doses (Ͻ0.5 mg/kg) of prednisone. 187 Pulse Steroid Therapy. The relative efficacy of intermittent high-dose pulse therapy with corticosteroids has not been investigated in controlled clinical trials. However, in retrospective studies, initial pulse therapy with intravenous methylprednisolone was found to be associated with a higher remission rate and more rapid normalization of serum CK activity than oral therapy alone in adult PM and DM, 164 and with more rapid disease control in juvenile DM. 119 It has also been recommended as being preferable to oral therapy for ongoing administration in severely disabled elderly patients with DM. 90 Pulse intravenous methylprednisolone may therefore be useful to obtain more rapid control in patients with severe myositis, or extramuscular manifestations such as interstitial lung disease or gastrointestinal angiopathy, in combination with ongoing oral prednisone and a steroid-sparing agent such as methotrexate or azathioprine. Pulse therapy with dexamethasone has also been claimed to be effective in an uncontrolled trial but requires further evaluation. 240 Corticosteroid Myopathy. Steroid myopathy should be suspected when there is persisting or increasing weakness, particularly of proximal lower limb muscles, after the serum CK level has declined or normalized. When the weakness is due to a steroid myopathy, it will usually improve if the dose of prednisone is gradually reduced or an alternate-day regimen is instituted. However, it is sometimes unclear whether increasing muscle weakness is due to active myositis, steroid myopathy, or a combination of the two, and it may be necessary to repeat the electromyographic studies and muscle biopsy. A regular exercise program may help to at least partially prevent or reverse steroid myopathy. 117 Relapses. Clinical relapses occur in a substantial proportion of cases of PM and DM. 204,232 Although some relapses occur during withdrawal of prednisone or immunosuppressive therapy, in our experience the majority occur in patients who are on steady maintenance therapy or who are off treatment and in remission. 208 When relapses occur, we recommend reinstituting daily prednisone in a dose of ϳ50 mg/day (0.7 mg/kg) for a few weeks. In more severe relapses, we also recommend starting methotrexate or azathioprine, or intravenous immunoglobulin in patients who are already taking an immunosuppressive agent (see below).

Steroid-Resistant Cases. Although most patients with PM or DM respond satisfactorily to corticosteroids, in 20 -30% of cases the response is slow or incomplete and it is then necessary to introduce a second-line agent (Fig. 3) and to reduce the dose of prednisone. Methotrexate and azathioprine have both been shown to be effective in steroid-resistant cases in open studies and case reports, but the response is slow and variable. 30,211,241 Few studies have evaluated the comparative efficacy of the two drugs. In one retrospective study, methotrexate was found to be superior to azathioprine in male patients and those with antisynthetase antibodies. 120 In a recent double-blind comparative trial of methotrexate and azathioprine, the two drugs had equal efficacy but methotrexate had a more favorable side-effect profile. 172 Methotrexate has the advantage that it can be given orally in a single weekly dose, and may also be administered by the intramuscular route if gastrointestinal side effects preclude oral use. 243 If the response to methotrexate is poor, we recommend adding azathioprine, as the combination of the two drugs is more effective than either alone in some patients. 243 In patients who fail to improve, we use intravenous immunoglobulin therapy (IVIg) or another immunosuppressive agent such as cyclophosphamide, cyclosporine, or mycophenolate mofetil.

Other Cytotoxic Agents. The only reports of the use of cyclophosphamide in the inflammatory myopathies are based on small open studies and case reports, and the results have been variable. 27,46 As the major effects of cyclophosphamide are on Bcells, 238 the drug may be better suited for the treatment of resistant cases of DM, particularly if there is associated vasculitis. 98 We favor cyclophosphamide over cyclosporine in such cases and in patients with myositis and associated interstitial lung disease, who are usually resistant to corticosteroids and other immunosuppressive agents. Although the drug can be given by the oral route, in our experience, intravenous pulse therapy is as effective and causes fewer side effects.

Cyclosporine has a more selective effect on T-cell activation and cytokine production by helper-inducer T-cells. 68 Although there are no reports of controlled trials in the literature, a number of small open studies and case reports indicate that the drug can be effective in steroid-dependent cases of juvenile DM and in some adult PM or DM patients, including cases with associated interstitial lung disease. 105,142,146,150,186,212,254 Our current practice is to reserve cyclosporine for patients with PM or DM who have failed to respond adequately to corticosteroids and to other immunosuppressive agents, and in whom IVIg has already been tried or is contraindicated. Tacrolimus, which also inhibits the activation of CD4 ϩ T helper cells, has been effective in a small group of patients with refractory polymyositis and associated interstitial lung disease with antisynthetase antibodies and warrants further evaluation. 192 Mycophenolate mofetil has been reported to be effective in some resistant cases of PM and DM and also in severe myasthenia gravis. 34,42,89,221 Although there have not as yet been any controlled trials, these initial reports have been promising both in terms of efficacy and side-effect profile and suggest that a trial of the drug is worth considering even before cyclophosphamide or cyclosporine in resistant cases. Fludarabine has also been found to be effective in some refractory cases of PM and DM and warrants further evaluation. 2 Intravenous Immunoglobulin. Intravenous immunoglobulin therapy has been shown to be effective in cases of drug-resistant DM in a double-blind crossover trial. 56 Improvement in muscle function was shown to correlate with reduced deposition of complement (C5b-9) in endomysial capillaries and downregulation of MHC-1, intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), and transforming growth factor-␤1 (TGF-␤1) expression in muscle biopsies 53,56,59 as well as a decline in serum levels of soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R). 96 IVIg has also been shown to be effective as add-on therapy in open studies in patients with PM, DM, and overlap syndromes. 36,39,96,160 However, IVIg is not effective in all cases 96,160 and did not suppress disease activity when used as first-line therapy without corticosteroids. 37 We recommend IVIg in patients with DM in whom the myositis remains active despite corticosteroids, methotrexate, and azathioprine, and also in resistant cases of PM and overlap syndromes, although the evidence for its efficacy in such cases is less convincing. We also recommend IVIg in patients who are unable to continue immunosuppressive agents because of adverse effects, and in patients with immunodeficiency in whom such agents may be contraindicated.

New Therapies. More specific forms of therapy targeting proinflammatory cytokines (e.g., TNF-␣ and IL-1␤), T-and B-cells and their receptors and signaling pathways, and cell adhesion molecules (e.g., integrins, matrix metalloproteinases) hold promise for the treatment of resistant cases of inflammatory myopathy. 55 There have been a number of preliminary reports of the successful use of anti-TNF-␣ therapy with infliximab (Remicaide) 106,148,188 and etanercept (Enbrel) 219 in resistant cases of juvenile and adult DM and PM. More formal evaluation of these agents in controlled clinical trials is now underway, and trials of T-and B-cell monoclonal antibodies are in the planning stages (M. Dalakas, personal communication). Interferon ␤-1a has also been reported to be effective in PM and warrants further evaluation. 66 Inclusion-Body Myositis. Resistance to treatment with conventional forms of immunotherapy is one of the characteristic features of IBM that distinguishes it from the other inflammatory myopathies. 194 Although occasional patients do respond to treatment with prednisone and immunosuppressive agents, at times dramatically, 108 even in such cases the response is usually incomplete and not sustained. 108,133,220 It is not known whether there are subgroups of IBM patients who are more likely to respond to treatment, and how these can be identified. However, there have been a number of case reports of a favorable response to corticosteroid and immunosuppressive therapy in patients with an associated autoimmune disease, and to immunoabsorption in a case with an associated monoclonal gammopathy. 184 A favorable response to mycophenolate has been reported in one case. 178 However, in most cases of IBM, there is continued deterioration, 14,201,217 in spite of the fact that the treatment reduces muscle inflammation and T-cell invasion of muscle fibers. 18 The efficacy and safety profile of a humanized monoclonal antibody to C5 complement in patients with DM is also being evaluated. 74 There have been a number of open studies of IVIg therapy, some finding improved function in less affected muscle groups, 160,228 whereas others reported no improvement. 5 In a short-term placebocontrolled trial of IVIg in 19 patients, 58 some experienced mild functional benefit but no significant improvement occurred in overall muscle strength. In a subsequent placebo-controlled trial of IVIg with prednisone, no beneficial effects were demonstrated. 59 In another placebo-controlled crossover study of 22 patients who received monthly IVIg for 6 months, apparent stabilization of the condition occurred in the majority of patients and mild improvement in a minority. 245 However, it appears from the results of these studies that any benefits from IVIg are likely to be modest and, at best, temporary. IVIg has been reported to have longer lasting effects in some patients 181 and sometimes to be beneficial in those with severe life-threatening dysphagia. 40 Intravenous antithymocyte globulin in combination with methotrexate was shown to halt disease progression in a small uncontrolled study 138 and warrants further evaluation.

New therapeutic strategies such as the use of interferon ␤ and cytokine-blocking agents also warrant testing in further controlled clinical trials. A recent 6-month placebo-controlled trial of interferon ␤-1a (30 g per week) failed to show any benefit. 102 A further trial using a higher dose regimen is currently underway (Griggs and Tawil, personal communication).

Empirical forms of treatment include coenzyme Q 10 , carnitine, and antioxidants. 72 One placebo-con-trolled trial of the synthetic testosterone analogue oxandrolone failed to show any significant improvement in muscle strength. 218 The nonsteroidal anabolic agent clenbuterol has resulted in disease stabilization in some of our patients who have been assessed with serial quantitative muscle testing (Mastaglia et al., unpublished observation) and warrants further evaluation in a controlled clinical trial.

In the absence of evidence that any currently available form of therapy alters the natural history of the disease, there are no firm guidelines for the treatment of IBM, and views differ as to whether a trial of corticosteroid and immunosuppressive therapy should be recommended. 161,194 Our current practice is to recommend a trial of prednisone (ϳ0.6 mg/kg) and a steroid-sparing agent such as methotrexate (starting at 10 mg/week) or azathioprine (1.5-2.5 mg/kg/day), provided that such treatment is not contraindicated by the patient's general medical condition and that the disorder is not too advanced. We avoid higher doses of prednisone because of the potential risk of inducing a steroid myopathy and further aggravating the muscle weakness. After commencement of treatment, the patient is monitored frequently and serial quantitative muscle testing is carried out. With improvement or stabilization of muscle strength, the dose of prednisone is gradually tapered and maintenance doses of the medications are continued. If muscle strength continues to deteriorate or side effects develop, the treatment is stopped.

Exercise Therapy. Exercise programs to improve muscle strength, endurance, and cardiovascular fitness have been used in the management of patients with various forms of myopathy, 203 but few studies examining the efficacy of such programs in inflammatory myopathy have been reported. The types of exercise that may be included in strength training programs include isometric, isotonic, and isokinetic (either concentric or eccentric) exercise. An increase in isometric torque and an improvement in functional activities was reported in five patients with IBM following a 12-week isotonic training program for the knee extensors and flexors and the elbow and wrist flexors. 229 In another study of five patients with acute PM or DM, there was an increase in strength following a program that included nonresisted exercise, manually resisted exercise, cycling, and stepping. 73 In addition to muscle weakness, a reduced aerobic capacity compared to matched controls has been reported in inflammatory myopathy. 249 A 6-week aerobic training program using a cycle ergometer resulted in a significant improve-ment in aerobic capacity and exercise tolerance in patients with PM or DM, and there was also an improvement in the isometric strength of the hip flexors and knee extensors and in a functional assessment scale. 248 There has previously been some concern that active resisted exercise, particularly eccentric exercise, would increase muscle damage in inflammatory myopathy. It has been shown that any rise in the serum CK level immediately post-exercise is transient and followed by a return to baseline levels. 73,229,248 In IBM patients, there were no consistent changes in the extent of inflammatory infiltrates in open muscle biopsies performed pre-and post-exercise. 229 In a pilot study that included two patients with IBM, increasing the number of repetitions of a resisted (30% of maximum torque) isotonic exercise improved strength in some muscles, but when the weight used was gradually increased over 6 weeks, muscle strength declined, possibly as a result of minor muscle damage caused by the eccentric lowering of the heavier weight. 207 These results indicate that carefully prescribed resisted strength and aerobic training programs may be undertaken safely by patients with active inflammatory myopathy. 147 Further research is needed to determine the optimal training protocols, but both resisted strength training and aerobic training programs may be of benefit to patients with inflammatory myopathy and may assist in counteracting the effects of both a reduced activity level and the administration of highdose corticosteroids. Improvement or maintenance of muscle strength, endurance, and cardiovascular fitness will have a positive effect on the ability of patients to be active and independent in daily life.

Assessing Response to Treatment and Disease Activity.

Evaluating the response to treatment and activity of the myositis requires reliable clinical and laboratory criteria and, when available, should include some quantitative measures of muscle strength and endurance 158,159 in addition to conventional manual muscle testing and MRC grading, which is relatively insensitive to change. Myometry using a hand-held instrument or computerized isokinetic dynamometry of selected muscle groups is suitable for the serial assessment of muscle function, particularly in clinical trials. In addition, the assessment protocol should ideally include some timed functional tests (e.g., time taken to stand up from a standard chair 10 times; time to walk 30 meters), functional scales, and tests of endurance, which are more pertinent to the performance of everyday activities. 47,121,158,250 Protocols for the assessment of disease activity and outcome in adult and juvenile myositis have recently been proposed. 101,174 Ventilatory function studies should be performed in patients with severe disease who may have weakness of the respiratory muscles.

Although previous studies have reached conflicting conclusions about the relationship between the serum CK level and disease activity, 158 the CK level remains the most reliable biochemical indicator of disease activity in the individual patient, provided that it is elevated to start with, and should be monitored at regular intervals (e.g., every 1-3 months) after starting treatment. The serum CK level usually starts to decline before clinical improvement occurs, but mild to moderate elevations may persist for some time even after the patient has made a functional recovery. 158 A rising serum CK level may be the first indication of disease reactivation in treated patients who have been in remission, even before muscle weakness develops. 158 A number of studies have demonstrated normalization of MRI changes with clinical improvement and a good correlation between T2 and STIR signal intensity, and disease activity and muscle function. 80,214 In addition, with 31 P magnetic resonance spectroscopy, it is possible to monitor the metabolic changes in muscle during treatment. 198 Although such studies may be valuable for the serial assessment of responses to treatment in clinical trials, their routine use to monitor the response to treatment is unnecessary.

The authors acknowledge financial support from the Neuromuscular Foundation of Western Australia, and the secretarial support of Mrs. S. Moncrieff.

FIGURE 1 .1FIGURE 1. (A) "Dropped head" in patient with sclerodermamyositis overlap. (B-D) Deformity of fingers (B), and weakness of finger flexors (C) and extensors (D), in patients with advanced inclusion-body myositis (IBM). (E) Technetium pyrophosphate scan showing multifocal subcutaneous calcinosis of the arms in a patient with juvenile dermatomyositis.

FIGURE 2 .2FIGURE 2. Dermatomyositis rash on the face (A), chest (B), and hands (C-E). (E,F) Subcutaneous calcinosis.

Table 1 .1Proposed classification of idiopathic inflammatory myopathies.IDermatomyositisJuvenileAdultIIPolymyositisT-cell mediated (␣/␤, ␥/␦)EosinophilicGranulomatousIIIOverlap syndromesWith polymyositisWith dermatomyositisWith inclusion-body myositisIVCancer-associated myositisVInclusion-body myositisVIOther formsFocal: orbital myositis; localized nodular myositis;inflammatory pseudotumorDiffuse: macrophagic myofasciitis; necrotizing myopathywith pipestem capillaries; infantile myositis

