Unfolding Story of Inclusion-Body Myositis and Myopathies: Role of Misfolded Proteins, Amyloid-␤, Cholesterol, and Aging

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis is recognized as the most common muscle disease beginning after age 50 years, leading to severe disability. Sporadic inclusion-body myositis is of unknown cause and unconfirmed pathogenesis.

Traditionally, sporadic inclusion-body myositis has been considered an inflammatory myopathy, together with polymyositis and dermatomyositis, and several recent reviews addressed the inflammatory aspects of these disorders. 1-3 However, although the inflammatory component of sporadic inclusion-body myositis muscle biopsies is undisputable, at least in the early stages, patients with sporadic inclusion-body myositis, as a group, respond poorly to antidysimmune treatment, in contrast to patients with polymyositis and dermatomyositis. [1][2][3]4 Patients over age 50 years with what could be considered "pure" polymyositis are rare; virtually all of the older patients with lymphocytic myositis have sporadic inclusion-body myositis.

An intriguing aspect of the sporadic inclusion-body myositis muscle-fiber molecular phenotype is its remarkable similarity to that of Alzheimer's disease brain (recently reviewed in Askanas and Engel 5 ). These similarities include accumulations of amyloid-␤ precursor protein, amyloid-␤, phosphorylated tau protein in the form of paired helical filaments, presenilin-1 protein, and several other "Alzheimercharacteristic proteins." 5 In sporadic inclusion-body myositis, the milieu of the aging muscle fiber might (a) modify the provocation of, and/or response to, the lymphocytic inflammation 5 and (b) promote development of the inclusion-body myositis characteristic progressive vacuolar degeneration. Another possibility exists that lymphocytic inflammation might be a secondary component, occurring in response to "foreign" protein abnormally accumulated within and foreignizing sporadic inclusion-body myositis muscle fiber. This possibility can be supported by the fact that inflammation, in addition to other abnormalities, is present in the muscle of transgenic mice overexpressing amyloid-␤ precursor protein in muscle fibers. [6][7][8] Moreover, lymphocytic inflammation 185

can occur in several human genetic muscle diseases, generally considered noninflammatory, including dysferlin deficiency, laminin-2 deficiency, and facioscapular muscular dystrophy. [9][10][11] In 1993, we introduced the term hereditary inclusionbody myopathies to designate hereditary muscle diseases with pathologic features strikingly resembling those of sporadic inclusion-body myositis except for a lack of lymphocytic inflammation-hence the term "myopathy" instead of "myositis." 12 The hereditary inclusion-body myopathies encompass several autosomal recessive and autosomal dominant syndromes of progressive muscle weakness with various clinical presentations (recently reviewed in Askanas and Engel 13 ).

Because the characteristic pathologic phenotype of hereditary inclusion-body myopathies is now well defined, we consider all hereditary muscle diseases whose muscle biopsies contain vacuoles and both types of the characteristic inclusion-body myopathy-type inclusions (see below) to be forms of hereditary inclusion-body myopathies. The hereditary inclusion-body myopathies can be grouped by their mode of inheritance and genetic mutation (Table 1). 13 We present a brief summary of clinical and pathologic features of sporadic inclusion-body myositis and hereditary inclusion-body myopathies, together referred to as "the IBMs," and discuss our current concepts of the pathogenesis including considerations as to how different etiologies can lead to very similar pathogenic cascades.

SPORADIC INCLUSION-BODY MYOSITIS: BRIEF SUMMARY OF CLINICAL FEATURES

The onset of sporadic inclusion-body myositis is usually after age 50 years, predominantly in men. 14,15 The muscle weakness is both distal and proximal in the lower and upper limbs. The quadriceps is prominently involved. 14,15 The slowly progressive course of sporadic inclusion-body myositis usually leads to severe disability and eventually to respiratory muscle weakness. Dysphagia is fairly common.

The late-juvenile sporadic inclusion-body myositis form was recently observed in three young unrelated males with a distribution of muscle weakness similar to that of sporadic inclusion-body myositis, but with onset age in their late teens (two patients) and at age 20 years (one patient). Their muscle biopsies had features of sporadic inclusion-body myositis, with some aspects of hereditary inclusion-body myopathies. We have proposed that yet unknown susceptibility genes are responsible for the early onset of sporadic inclusion-body myositis in these patients. 16 We have recently emphasized the potential importance of susceptibility genes on the basis of a patient who had sporadic inclusion-body myositis and transthyretin gene mutation. 17 This patient is a 70-year-old man homozygous for the transthyretin VAL122ILE mutation, who has both sporadic inclusion-body myositis and cardiac amyloidosis. 17 Unique pathologic features of his muscle biopsy included prominent blood vessel congophilic amyloid immunoreactive for transthyretin and, within the vacuolated muscle fibers, congophilic deposits coimmunoreactive for both transthyretin and amyloid-␤.

Because wild transthyretin is known to sequester amyloid-␤ and to prevent fibrillogenesis, we suggest that the transthyretin mutation in this patient might be promoting the amyloid fibrillogenesis of amyloid-␤ within the muscle fibers and muscle blood vessels. In this particular patient, the senile cardiac amyloidosis, muscle blood vessel amyloidosis, and sporadic inclusion-body myositis all possibly relate to the transthyretin mutation, raising the possibility that otherwise benign mutations of various susceptibility genes can promote sporadic inclusion-body myositis in other patients. If the transthyretin VAL122ILE mutation was a factor in the sporadic inclusion-body myositis pathogenesis in our patient, it had existed since conception, but his muscle weakness did not develop until after the age of 60 years, suggesting the importance of an aging cellular environment in this process.

SUMMARY OF DIFFERENT FORMS OF HEREDITARY INCLUSION-BODY MYOPATHIES

Hereditary inclusion-body myopathies encompass several heterogeneic syndromes, each characterized by progressive muscle weakness but having different clinical manifestations. Hereditary inclusion-body myopathies are inherited either as an autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant trait. The clinical onset is usually in the second or third decade or sometimes earlier (a detailed review of various forms of hereditary inclusion-body myopathies is in Askanas and Engel 13 ). Table 1 illustrates our recent classification of hereditary inclusion-body myopathies, including recently identified mutated genes present in some forms.

Of particular interest are mutations identified in the GNE gene in quadriceps sparing hereditary inclusion-body myopathies in Persian Jews, Japanese patients, and other ethnic groups. [8][9][10][11][12][13][14][15][16][17][18][19][20][21] UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 2-epimerase/Nacetylmannosamine kinase (GNE) is a bifunctional enzyme catalyzing the first two steps in the synthesis of N-acetylneuraminic (sialic) acid. [22][23][24] In hereditary inclusion-body myopathies, missense mutations were found in the kinase (amino terminus) and epimerase (carboxyl terminus) domains. [18][19][20] GNE modulates the structure of many protein complexes in virtually all organs. [22][23][24] GNE-dependent synthesis of sialic acid occurs in the cytoplasm (in addition, some sialic acid can be derived from several other sources, including cell-surface glycoproteins and lipids cleaved in the lysosomal compartment). Sialic acid is a terminal component of glycan structures bound to proteins and gangliosides. It is considered to play important roles in several cellular processes, including cellular adhesion, formation of and/or marking recognition sites for toxins and other pathogenic agents, stabilization of glycoprotein structures, signal transduction, and cell-mediated immune responses. [22][23][24] Because of the important cellular functions of sialic acid, any dysregulation of its biosynthesis and distribution can lead to severe abnormalities of glycoconjugate biosynthesis. 24 The mechanism of how the mutations in the GNE gene lead to the development of the quadriceps sparing hereditary inclusion-body myopathies awaits clarification.

CHARACTERISTIC FEATURES OF SPORADIC INCLUSION-BODY MYOSITIS MUSCLE BIOPSIES

Characteristic light-microscopic features of sporadic inclusion-body myositis muscle biopsies are vacuolated muscle fibers and degrees of lymphocytic inflammation, with some macrophages, varying from abundant in early stages to little or none in later stages of involvement of the sampled muscle. Sixty to eighty percent of the sporadic inclusion-body myositis vacuolated muscle fibers contain, mainly in their nonvacuolated regions, foci of amyloid as defined by Congo red fluorescence visualized through Texas red filters. 25 Ultrastructural abnormalities include the presence of characteristic clusters of 15 to 21 nm diameter paired helical filaments containing phosphorylated tau protein, 26 located in both vacuolated and nonvacuolated muscle fibers, strikingly resembling paired helical filaments of Alzheimer's disease brain.

To diagnose sporadic inclusion-body myositis, we recommend that the following be performed on 10 m sections of a fresh-frozen muscle biopsy: (1) Engel-modifed trichrome stain to visualize, in addition to mononuclear cell inflammation and vacuolated muscle fibers, small angular fibers, ragged-red fibers, rare necrotizing fibers, and regen-degen fibers 27 ; (2) fluorescence-enhanced Congo red stain 25 ; (3) SMI-31 monoclonal antibody immunocytochemical staining, which recognizes the phosphorylated tau protein of paired helical filaments in sporadic inclusion-body myositis 26 ; and (4) if SMI-31 antibody is not available, ubiquitin immunoreactivity within muscle fibers of sporadic inclusion-body myositis, which can be used to differentiate it from polymyositis. 28,29 We and others consider that there is an important denervation component in sporadic inclusion-body myositis. 5 

CHARACTERISTIC FEATURES OF HEREDITARY INCLUSION-BODY MYOPATHY MUSCLE BIOPSIES

Most of the pathologic features of the muscle biopsies of hereditary inclusion-body myopathies are similar to those of sporadic inclusion-body myositis, but hereditary inclusionbody myopathy muscle biopsies usually lack lymphocytic mononuclear inflammation. In contrast to the abnormal muscle fibers in sporadic inclusion-body myositis, in hereditary inclusion-body myopathies, most of the vacuolated muscle fibers do not contain Congo red positivity (with the exception of one autosomal dominant form whose muscle fibers and their nuclei contained large congophilic inclusions). 30 Also, in contrast to the features of sporadic inclusion-body myositis, in hereditary inclusion-body myopathies, paired helical filaments lack some epitopes of phosphorylated tau protein, are not congophilic, and do not contain apolipoprotein-E. 31,32 Therefore, in patients with hereditary inclusion-body myopathies, compared with those with sporadic inclusion-body myositis, muscle pathologic features seem somewhat less advanced, possibly owing to the younger age of the patients with hereditary inclusion-body myopathies.

POSSIBLE PATHOGENIC MECHANISMS OF SPORADIC AND HEREDITARY INCLUSION-BODY MYOPATHIES

Specificity of the Inclusion-Body Myopathy Phenotype

The unusual constellations of proteins constituting the inclusion of inclusion-body myopathy abnormal muscle fibers are characteristic of sporadic inclusion-body myositis and hereditary inclusion-body myopathies and, in our experience, do not occur in either the vacuolated or nonvaculolated fibers of other muscle diseases. The only exception is oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy, 33 which, for this reason, can be considered a form of hereditary inclusionbody myopathy. 13,34 The occasional vacuoles and tubulofilaments, reported in rare muscle fibers in a few other muscle diseases, for example, in patients with myotonic dystrophy (and, if so, in older patients [V. Askanas and W.K. Engel, unpublished observation, 1998]), are very sparse and probably not pathogenically significant for those diseases. We previously postulated that in the various inclusion-body myopathies, different etiologies lead to a downstream common pathogenic cascade, which ultimately is responsible for the characteristic muscle fiber degeneration. This would be the same principle as in Alzheimer's disease, in which at least five different genes (and other unknown factors) lead to the same pathologic phenotype in the brain. 35 

Possible Mechanisms Governing Formation of the Inclusion Bodies in the Inclusion-Body Myopathy Muscle

On a given section of an inclusion-body myopathy muscle biopsy, the inclusion bodies are present mainly in the vacuolefree regions of the vacuolated muscle fiber cytoplasm and in the cytoplasm of the nonvacuolated fibers. The inclusion body of inclusion-body myopathy muscle was originally described ultrastructurally as a cluster of tubulofilaments of unknown molecular composition. 14 Subsequently, our cytochemical, immunocytochemical, and ultrastructural studies have demonstrated two major types of intracellular inclusions in the inclusion-body myopathies. 5 Light-microscopically, there are rounded, plaque-like inclusions containing mainly amyloid-␤ and various-sized squiggly, linear inclusions mainly composed of phosphorylated tau protein. 5 Both types of inclusions contain several accumulated proteins, some of which are present in both. 5,15 Both forms of inclusions are "amyloid" positive, as evidenced by their reactivity with crystal violet, thioflavin S, and Congo red stains, implying that they contain proteins in the ␤-pleated sheet configuration. 5 Ultrastructurally, amyloid-␤-immunoreactive inclusions appear as aggregates of 6 to 10 nm amyloid-like fibrils and amorphous material, whereas inclusions containing phosphorylated tau protein appear as 15 to 21 nm paired helical filaments. 5,15 In general, more than 20 unrelated proteins, including, amyloid-␤, prion, tau, and transthyretin, abnormally unfold and self-aggregate to form ␤-pleated sheet amyloid. 36 Although amyloid fibrils were previously considered to be cytotoxic, there is current experimental evidence that preamyloid complexes or aggregates, either diffuse or in a protofibril stage, can be very cytotoxic. [36][37][38] Mechanisms responsible for formations of the multiprotein inclusions in the inclusion-body myopathy muscle are not understood, but unfolding and misfolding of the proteins probably play a role. In general, protein aggregation is considered to be caused by binding of partly unfolded or misfolded polypeptides induced by interaction among their inappropriately exposed hydrophobic surfaces. [36][37][38] Those interactions were recently shown to be highly specific. 39 Aggregates of improperly folded proteins are usually cytoplasmic and occasionally nuclear; correctly folded (normal) proteins are usually soluble, structural, or associated with cell membranes. 38 Unfolding or misfolding of otherwise normal proteins can occur in vivo and in vitro under several circumstances, including macromolecular crowding, oxidative stress, exposure to toxins, and "aging." 38 Markers of oxidative stress are increased in the inclusion-body myopathy muscle, 5 and this mechanism could also contribute to abnormal folding or misfolding of proteins. Variously mutated proteins have a strong propensity to unfold or misfold. 38 Aggregations of proteins into insoluble intracellular complexes and inclusion bodies have been proposed to be importantly related to several neurodegenerative disorders, including Alzheimer's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Huntington's disease, and Parkinson's disease. 38 In accordance with this proposal are our recent studies demonstrating the unfolded protein response in the muscle of patients with sporadic inclusion-body myopathies. 40 The unfolded protein response is indicative of the endoplasmic reticulum stress and the presence there of the improperly folded proteins. 41 Several of the proteins accumulated in inclusion-body myopathy muscle fibersincluding, amyloid-␤, prion, phosphorylated tau, presenilin-1, ␣-synuclein, and superoxide dismytase 1 (SOD1)-have the propensity to pathologically unfold/misfold and thereby could contribute to the endoplasmic reticulum stress in the inclusion-body myopathies.

Key Role of Intracellular Accumulation of Amyloid-␤ Precursor Protein/Amyloid-␤ in Inclusion-Body Myopathy Muscle Fibers

We have proposed a key upstream or mid-stream role of increased intracellular amyloid-␤ precursor protein/amyloid-␤ in the pathogenesis of both sporadic and hereditary inclusion-body myopathies, suggesting that it is causing abnormal signal transduction, modulation of other genes, induction of oxidative stress, mitochondrial malfunction, and other abnormalities. 5 Our hypothesis is supported by our tissueculture studies, which have shown the following:

1. Experimental overexpression of amyloid-␤ precursor protein through direct amyloid-␤ precursor protein gene transfer (via adenovirus vector) into human normal, rather mature, cultured muscle fibers induced several aspects of the inclusion-body myopathy pathologic phenotype, including vacuolation, intracellular congophilia, nuclear paired helical filaments, and abnormal mitochondria. 42,43 2. In cultured hereditary inclusion-body myopathy muscle fibers, an amyloid-␤ precursor protein overexpression, presumably genetically determined, preceded other detectable inclusion-body myopathy-like abnormalities. 5 3. In contrast to normal control cultured human muscle, both experimentally and genetically amyloid-␤ precursor protein-overexpressing cultured muscle fibers had abnormal neuromuscular junctions and could not become innervated by cocultured fetal-rat spinal cord neurons. 44 Those results led us to propose that in inclusion-body myopathy, muscle intracellular amyloid-␤ precursor protein overexpression is responsible for the postulated "myogenous denervation" and for the recently reported neuromuscular junction abnormalities in inclusion-body myopathy biopsies. 5,44 Additional support for our hypothesis of an intracellular toxicity of amyloid-␤ precursor protein and amyloid-␤ in the inclusion-body myopathy pathogenesis was provided by two transgenic mouse models overexpressing amyloid-␤ precursor protein within muscle fibers. Some aspects of the human inclusion-body myopathy pathology were produced but only during aging of these mice. 7,8 

Cholesterol and Related Mechanisms in the Inclusion-Body Pathogenesis

Cholesterol is a component of native apolipoprotein-E-containing lipoprotein particles. 45 We recently showed that inclusion-body myopathy muscle fibers contained accumulations of free (nonesterified) cholesterol that colocalized with low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) and very lowdensity lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR) immunoreactive inclusions, as well as with amyloid-␤ and phosphorylated tau protein. 46 This suggested that in inclusion-body myopathy muscle fibers, accumulation of free cholesterol may represent another consequence, in addition to apolipoprotein-E accumulation, of the increased expression and ectopic accumulation of LDLR and VLDLR. 46 Most recently, we demonstrated that caveolin-1, an intracellular transporter of cholesterol, is accumulated in inclusion-body myopathy muscle fibers, where it colocalizes with both free cholesterol and amyloid-␤. 47 Caveolin-1, a major protein of plasmalemmal microdomain caveolae, binds cholesterol and influences its intracellular traffic and homeostasis. 48 Our studies suggest that within inclusion-body myopathy muscle fibers, traffic of cholesterol is perturbed, resulting in its demonstrated accumulation there. Experimentally, cholesterol influences amyloid-␤ precursor protein processing, resulting in increased amyloid-␤ production, and it increases amyloid-␤ amyloidogenesis. 46 Loading cultured cells with free cholesterol increased generation of amyloid-␤ from amyloid-␤ precursor protein, whereas cholesterol depletion did the opposite. 46 The mechanism by which cholesterol influences amyloid-␤ precursor protein processing is not known, but one possibility could involve direct or indirect inhibition of the amyloid-␤ precursor protein ␣-secretase. 46 Cholesterol binds amyloid-␤ and, by altering amyloid-␤ conformation, enhances its amyloidogenic ("seeding") properties. 30 We propose that within inclusion-body myopathy muscle fibers, cholesterol, instead of being properly metabolized or cleared, is deposited, in spatial association with lipoprotein receptors, apolipoprotein-E and caveolin-1, at sites of amyloid-␤ accumulation and possibly at sites of amyloid-␤ precursor protein processing. At those sites, cholesterol could be increasing amyloid-␤ production and inducing amyloid-␤ amyloidogenesis.

Possible Role of Muscle-Fiber Aging

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis typically becomes clinically manifest after age 50 years and more often in the sixties and seventies. Among sporadic "inflammatory myopathy" patients, the above-described specific degenerative accumulations of proteins, messenger ribonucleic acids, and cholesterol (see below) within muscle fibers occur only in sporadic inclusion-body myositis, not in polymyositis or dermatomyositis. But they do occur in the hereditary inclusion-body myopathies, which typically lack the lymphocytic inflammatory component. We suggest that those accumulations are related to an aging-based degenerative pathogenic cascade. In the hereditary inclusionbody myopathies, the causative gene abnormality exists from conception but does not produce clinically evident muscle damage until the second, third, or fourth decade of life. We postulate that a specific hereditary inclusion-body myopathy genetic defect, combined with the adult "earlyaging" muscle fiber milieu, leads to the hereditary inclusionbody myopathy characteristic of vacuolar degeneration. In the cellular milieu of the aging muscle fiber, there can be diminished homeostatic mechanisms caused by either underexpression of "youthful" genes encoding beneficial cellular factors or overexpression of yet unknown "aging" genes encoding toxic cellular factors.

For example, cellular aging has been shown to promote accumulation of abnormal proteins and slow the degradation rate of normal and abnormal proteins. 38 The unfolding knowledge of aging-related protein misfolding and aggregation could clarify mechanisms presumably relevant to the inclusion-body myopathies and possibly help to develop treatment approaches.

Our studies described in this review were supported in part by the National Institutes of Health (grants NS34103 and AG16768), the Muscular Dystrophy Association and Alzheimer Foundation, and the Helen Lewis, Sheldon Katz, and Ron Stever Research Funds.

Table 1 Hereditary Inclusion-Body Myopathies1Gene/Linkage

