Cystatin C colocalizes with amyloid-β and coimmunoprecipitates with amyloid-β precursor protein in sporadic inclusion-body myositis muscles

Cystatin C (CC), an endogenous cysteine protease inhibitor, is accumulated within amyloid-b (Ab) amyloid deposits in Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain and was proposed to play a role in the AD pathogenesis. Because the chemo-morphologic muscle phenotype of sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM) has several similarities with the phenotype of AD brain, including abnormal accumulation of Ab deposits, we studied expression and localization of CC in muscle biopsies of 10 s-IBM, and 16 disease-and five normal-control muscle biopsies. Physical interaction of CC with amyloid-b precursor protein (AbPP) was studied by a combined immunoprecipitation/immunoblotting technique in the s-IBM muscle biopsies and in AbPP-overexpressing cultured human muscle fibers. In all s-IBM muscle biopsies, CC-immunoreactivity either colocalized with, or was adjacent to, the Ab-immunoreactive inclusions in 80-90% of the vacuolated muscle fibers, mostly in non-vacuolated regions of their cytoplasm. Ultrastructurally, CC immunoreactivity-colocalized with Ab on 6-10 nm amyloid-like fibrils and floccular material. By immunoblotting, CC expression was strongly increased in IBM muscle as compared to the controls. By immunoprecipitation/immunoblotting experiments, CC coimmunoprecipitated with AbPP, both in s-IBM muscle and in AbPP-overexpressing cultured normal human muscle fibers. Our studies (i) demonstrate for the first time that CC physically associates with AbPP, and (ii) suggest that CC may play a novel role in the s-IBM pathogenesis, possibly by influencing AbPP processing and Ab deposition.

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM) is a progressive, debilitating and the most common muscle disease of older persons (reviewed by Askanas and Engel 2002). s-IBM muscle pathology includes: (i) vacuolar degeneration of muscle fibers accompanied by (a) intrafiber Ab deposits and (b) focal cytoplasmic accumulations of 15-21 nm-diameter paired-helical filaments (PHFs) containing phosphorylated tau, both of which are congophilic; and (ii) various degrees of mononuclear-cell inflammation. The molecular-morphologic phenotype of s-IBM muscle is similar to that of Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain (Askanas and Engel 2002) including, in addition to the collections of Ab (Askanas et al. 1993a) and PHF tau (Mirabella et al. 1996), accumulations of apolipoprotein E, markers of oxidative stress, and several other 'Alzheimer-characteristic' proteins (all reviewed in Askanas and Engel 2002). Increased within s-IBM muscle fibers and postulated to participate in abnormal amyloid-b precursor protein (AbPP) processing and Ab production are: transcription of AbPP, the AbPP b-secretases BACE1 and BACE2, and presenilin1, which is a c-secretase cofactor (Askanas et al. 1998;Vattemi et al. 2001;Askanas and Engel 2002). Experimentally induced intracellular overexpression of AbPP/Ab in cultured human muscle leads to aspects of the IBM phenotype (Askanas et al. 1996;Askanas et al. 1997). Accordingly, AbPP/Ab appears to play a key role in the IBM pathogenesis. However, still unknown are the mechanisms leading to the specific s-IBM vacuolar muscle degeneration and the mechanisms underlying abnormal AbPP processing, Ab deposition and fibrillogenesis, and AbPP/Ab intracellular interaction with other proteins in s-IBM muscle fibers.

Human cystatin C (CC), a 14-kDa protein consisting of 120 amino acid residues with two disulfide bonds, belongs to family 2 of the cystatin superfamily (reviewed in Grubb 2002). CC is a ubiquitously expressed high-affinity cysteine protease inhibitor regulating activities of endogenous enzymes, such as cathepsins B, H, L, K and S (Grubb 2002). CC itself has a tendency to form amyloid fibrils (Janowski et al. 2001;Staniforth et al. 2001) and to associate with other amyloidogenic proteins (Ghiso et al. 1986;Haan and Roos 1992;Levy et al. 2001). In patients with Icelandic type of the hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis (HCHWA), caused by the L68Q CC mutation, CC is accumulated in small blood vessels where it colocalizes with Ab and the congophilic amyloid deposits (Ghiso et al. 1986). In the Dutch form of HCHWA, caused by mutation of AbPP, but not CC, CC is also accumulated and it colocalizes with Ab amyloid deposits (Haan and Roos 1992). In sporadic AD brain, CC was recently found to be colocalized with Ab amyloid deposits in senile plaques and in blood vessels, and to be increased in the Ab42 immunoreactive pyramidal neurons (Deng et al. 2001;Levy et al. 2001). Association of a CC gene polymorphism with late-onset sporadic AD has also been reported (Finckh et al. 2000;Beyer et al. 2001). CC is also accumulated in cerebral senile plaques of transgenic mice carrying the AbPP Swedish mutation (Steinhoff et al. 2001).

The present investigation aimed to study whether CC participates in the s-IBM pathogenesis.

Materials and methods

Muscle biopsies

Immunocytochemical studies were performed on transverse sections of freshly frozen diagnostic muscle biopsies from 31 patients with the following diagnoses: s-IBM 10; dermatomyositis three; polymyositis three; morphologically non-specific myopathy three; mitochondrial myopathy one; amyotrophic lateral sclerosis three; chronic peripheral neuropathy three; and normal muscle five. Diagnoses were based on clinical and laboratory investigations, including 18-reaction diagnostic histochemistry of muscle-biopsies routinely performed in our laboratory. Biopsies of all IBM patients had: muscle fibers with vacuoles on Engel modified-trichrome staining; SMI-31 immunoreactivity (Askanas et al. 1996a); 15-21 nm PHFs by electronmicroscopy; and Congo-red amyloid positivity using fluorescence enhancement (Askanas et al. 1993b).

Light-microscopic immunocytochemistry

Immunocytochemistry was performed on 10 lm transverse sections of fresh-frozen muscle biopsies, using peroxidase-antiperoxidase (PAP) and fluorescence methods, as described (Askanas et al. 1993a;Mirabella et al. 1996;Askanas et al. 1998;Askanas et al. 2000). Two well-characterized (Deng et al. 2001;Steinhoff et al. 2001) rabbit polyclonal antibodies against cystatin C (Dako, Carpenteria, CA, USA and Upstate Biotechnology, Lake Placid, NY, USA) diluted 1 : 750 and 1 : 500, respectively, were used.

For double-immunofluorescence, a rabbit polyclonal antibody against cystatin C was combined with one of the following antibodies: (i) mouse monoclonal antibody 6E10, diluted 1 : 100 (Signet, Dedham, MA) which recognizes Ab in both AD brain (Kim et al. 1990) and IBM muscle (Askanas et al. 2000), and recognizes the Ab region within the parent AbPP molecule as well as free Ab40 and Ab42; (ii) mouse monoclonal antibody against desmin (Zymed Laboratories, South San Francisco, CA, USA), which identifies regenerating (strongly positive) and necrotizing (negative) muscle fibers (Askanas et al. 1998;Askanas et al. 2000), diluted 1 : 20; (iii) a-bungarotoxin (a-BT) conjugated to the fluorescent marker Alexa (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR, USA), which binds to the postsynaptic nicotinic acetylcholine receptors at neuromuscular junctions (NMJs); (iv) biotinylated endothelial marker Ulex Europaeus Agglutin I (UEA I) (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA). Double localization of CC immunoreactivity and Congo-red fluorescence staining on the same section was performed as we described (Mirabella et al. 1996). In addition, on serial sections, CC immunoreactivity was compared to that of Ab42, using a rabbit polyclonal antibody specific for the carboxyl terminal of Ab42, diluted 1 : 100 (Biosource, Camarillo, CA, USA).

To block non-specific binding of antibody to Fc receptors, sections were preincubated with normal goat or rabbit serum diluted 1 : 10, as described (Askanas et al. 1993a;Mirabella et al. 1996;Askanas et al. 1998;Askanas et al. 2000). Controls for staining specificity were omission of the primary antibody, or its replacement with non-immune sera or irrelevant antibodies.

Immuno-electronmicroscopy

This was done on 10 lm unfixed frozen sections adhered to the bottom of 35-mm Petri dishes, as detailed (Askanas et al. 1993a;Mirabella et al. 1996;Askanas et al. 1998;Askanas et al. 2000). For single immunolabeling, CC was immunolocalized with a rabbit anti-CC antibody followed by a goat secondary antibody conjugated to 10 nm gold particles. For double immunolocalization of CC and Ab, sections were incubated concurrently in a rabbit polyclonal anti-CC antibody and the monoclonal 6E10 antibody against Ab. This was followed by incubation in two different species-specific secondary antibodies conjugated either to 10 or 5 nm gold particles as described (Askanas et al. 1993a;Askanas et al. 2000). Subsequently, the sections were fixed in a 2% paraformaldehyde 1.25% glutaraldehyde mixture, postfixed in 1% osmium tetroxide, and Epon-embedded in situ in the Petri dish. On adjacent sections stained with PAP, muscle fibers immunopositive for cystatin C were light-microscopically identified. The adjacent sections embedded in the dish were then viewed under phase-contrast microscopy, and those same muscle fibers were marked, drilled-out, and processed for electronmicroscopy, as described (Askanas et al. 1993a;Mirabella et al. 1996;Askanas et al. 1998;Askanas et al. 2000).

Immunoblotting

Western blot analysis was performed as described (Mirabella et al. 1996), with minor modifications. Briefly, 20 lm-thick sections of freshly frozen muscle were collected at ) 25°C and rapidly homogenized on ice in 10 mM Tris-Cl pH 7.4, containing 150 mM NaCl, 15 mM EDTA, and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF). Protein concentration was measured by the Bradford method. 15 lg of protein was loaded on 12% polyacrylamide gel, separated by electrophoresis, and then transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane for 1 h at 100 V in a buffer containing 182 mM glycine, 6 mM Tris, 20% methanol, pH 8.2. Nitrocellulose membranes were blocked in 5% (w/v) blocking reagent (Amersham, Piscataway, NJ) in PBS plus 0.1% Tween 20, and were incubated overnight at 4°C in anticystatin C antibody (Dako) diluted 1: 2000. After being washed, the membrane was incubated with species-specific secondary antibody conjugated to HRP. The blots were developed using an enhanced chemiluminescence system (ECL) (Amersham). Protein loading was evaluated by the actin band visualized with a monoclonal antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA).

Combined immunoprecipitation/immunoblot procedure

To evaluate whether CC physically associates with AbPP, a combined immunoprecipitation/immunoblot technique was performed according to established techniques. In brief, 100 lg total muscle protein was diluted in 1 mL precipitation buffer [1% Triton X-100, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA pH 8.0, 0.2 mM sodium ortho-vanadate, 0.2 mM PMSF, 0.5% NP-40]; either 3 lg of CC antibody (Dako) or 5 lg of 6E10 antibody was added. The reaction mixture was incubated overnight at 4°C on a orbital shaker. 10 lL 50% Protein A:Agarose (BD Transduction Laboratories, San Diego, CA, USA) was added, and the reaction mixture was incubated for 2 h at 4°C. That solution was centrifuged for 4 min (16 000 g at 4°C) and supernatant removed. The precipitated immunocomplex was washed twice with the precipitation buffer by centrifuging 4 min (16 000 g at 4°C). The pellet was resuspended in 30 lL of 2X concentrated sample buffer, boiled for 5 min and centrifuged for 5 min (16 000 g at 4°C). 10 lL of the supernatant was loaded onto sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and separated by electrophoresis. Gels were then transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane and western blotted with 6E10 antibody (diluted 1 : 1000) for the CC immunoprecipitate, or with CC antibody (Dako, diluted 1 : 2000), for the AbPP immunoprecipitate. Then an appropriate an HRP-labeled secondary antibody and ECL western blotting detection reagents (Amersham) were used.

Cultured human muscle fibers

Tissue cultures of normal human muscle were established, as we described, from satellite cells of portions of diagnostic muscle biopsies from patients who, after all tests were performed, were considered free of muscle disease (reviewed in Askanas and Engel 1992). Cultures were initially maintained in F14 medium (Gibco/ Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Hyclone, Logan, UT, USA), insulin (10 lg/mL, Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA), and an antibiotic/antimycotic mixture (Sigma), and subsequently maintained in the serum-free medium (Pegolo et al. 1990). This medium promotes differentiation of aneurally cultured human muscle fibers and enables their maintenance for several weeks (Pegolo et al. 1990). Cultures were processed for immunocytochemistry and immunoblots as described (Askanas et al. 1996b(Askanas et al. , 1997)).

The AbPP-gene was transferred into 2-week-old cultured muscle fibers using an adenovirus vector, as described (Askanas et al. 1996b(Askanas et al. , 1997)). Four days after the AbPP gene transfer, AbPP-overexpressing and control cultures were processed for the combined immunoprecipitation/immunoblot studies as described above for s-IBM muscle.

Results

Light-microscopic immunocytochemistry s-IBM In all s-BM muscle biopsies, 80-90% of the vacuolated muscle fibers contained, mainly in their non-vacuolated cytoplasm, numerous well-defined, plaque-like inclusions strongly immunoreactive with the antibodies against cystatin C. Also, in all biopsies, 2-5% of the non-vacuolated, otherwise normal-appearing (on a given cross-section) fibers contained similar inclusions. On sections double-immunostained for both Ab and CC, CC-immunoreactive inclusions were either colocalized with, or were adjacent to, Abimmunoreactive inclusions (Figs 1a-f). At the individual sites, CC-immunoreactivity appeared slightly more extensive than Ab-immunoreactivity (Figs 1a-f). On serial sections stained for CC and Ab42, CC-immunoreactive inclusions were present in all Ab42-immunopositive muscle fibers (not shown). On sections double-stained for CC and Congo red, CC-immunoreactive inclusions colocalized with Congo-red positivity (Figs 1g and h).

Other diseased and normal human muscle

None of the disease-or normal-control muscle biopsies had CC immunopositive inclusions like those present in the s-IBM abnormal muscle fibers. A subset of necrotizing muscle fibers, identified by negative desmin immunoreactivity, in polymyositis, dermatomyositis and morphologically non-specific myopathies had slightly increased diffused cytoplasmic CC-immunoreactivity (Figs 2c-e). A subset of small regenerating muscle fibers, identified by strong desmin immunoreactivity, had slightly increased diffuse cytoplasmic CC-immunoreactivity (Figs 2a and b). At the postsynaptic domain of the neuromuscular junctions (NMJs) as identified by a-BT binding, in all control and s-IBM biopsies containing them, there was strong CC-immunoreactivity that closely colocalized with a-BT bound to the nicotinic receptors (Figs 2f-i). In all biopsies, capillaries were positive for cystatin C (not shown). Omission or replacement of the primary antibodies prevented the immunostaining in all biopsies.

Electronmicroscopy-immunocytochemistry

In s-IBM abnormal muscle fibers, CC was accumulated on 6-10 nm amyloid-like fibrils and on electron-dense floccular material (Figs 3a and b). In addition, CC immunoreactivity was present on 6-10 nm amyloid-fibrils adjacent to the periphery of, but not within, some PHF clusters (Fig. 3c). By double-immunolabeling, both CC and Ab were associated with 6-10 nm amyloid-like fibrils and floccular material (Figs 3d and e).

Immunoblots

In normal and s-IBM muscle biopsies, CC migrated as a 14 kDa band, as previously described in other tissues (Deng et al. 2001). The band intensity in s-IBM muscle biopsies was much stronger than in control normal muscle (Fig. 4a).

Immunoprecipitation

Immunoprecipitation with the anticystatin C antibody of IBM muscle biopsies, followed by western blotting and  immunoprobing with anti-Ab mouse monoclonal 6E10 antibody, which can recognize either Ab or AbPP, revealed a 130 kDa band corresponding to the mature form of AbPP, while control muscle expressed no bands (Fig. 4b). In the reverse experiments, immunoprecipitation of s-IBM muscle with anti-Ab mouse monoclonal 6E10 antibody, This shows that AbPP+ cultured muscle fibers express a 14-kDa band corresponding to cystatin C, while cultured control muscle fibers are negative.  followed by western blotting and immunoprobing with the anti-CC antibody, revealed a 14 kDa band corresponding to cystatin C, while control muscle expressed no bands (Fig. 4c).

Cultured human muscle fibers

Cytoplasm of the 3-week-old cultured control human muscle fibers was diffusely stained with anti-CC antibodies (Fig. 4d, upper panel)) and a 14 kDa band was present on immunoblots (Fig. 4d, lower panel). In the AbPP-overexpressing cultured human muscle fibers, immunoprecipitation with anti-CC antibody, followed by western blotting and immunoprobing with 6E10 antibody, revealed two bands, at 115 kDa and 130 kDa, representing the immature and mature form of AbPP, respectively (Fig. 4e). Control cultured human muscle fibers did not have any bands corresponding to AbPP (Fig. 4e). In the reverse experiments, immunoprecipitation of AbPP-overexpressing cultured human muscle fibers with 6E10 antibody, followed by western blotting and immunoprobing with anti-CC antibody, revealed a strong 14 kDa band, corresponding to cystatin C, while control cultured muscle fibers did not have any bands (Fig. 4f). Considered together, these studies suggest that in AbPP-overexpressing cultured human muscle fibers similarly to the s-IBM biopsied muscle, CC coimmunoprecipitates with AbPP.

Discussion

Our studies demonstrate that CC is multifocally abnormally accumulated in s-IBM muscle fibers, where it colocalizes with Ab and Congo red by light microscopy. By goldimmuno-electronmicroscopy, CC colocalizes with Ab on 6-10 nm amyloid-like fibrils and on floccular material, the latter proposed to represent insoluble but less-organized amyloid or a preamyloid material (Askanas et al. 1993a). [In s-IBM muscle fibers, 6-10 nm amyloid-like fibrils are known to contain immunoreactive Ab but are lacking the C-and N-termini of AbPP (Askanas et al. 1993a).] These morphologic data suggest an association between depositions of Ab and CC. This interpretation is further supported by our imunoprecipitation results indicating that in s-IBM muscle, as well as in the AbPP-overexpressing cultured human muscle fibers, CC physically interacts with AbPP, suggesting its possibly playing a role in AbPP processing and Ab generation.

It is known that the Ab fragment is released from AbPP by the combined action of band c-secretases (reviewed in Nunan and Small 2000;Selkoe 2001). a-secretases BACE1 and BACE2, cleave AbPP at the N-terminal epitope of Ab. c-Secretase cleaves AbPP at the C-terminal of Ab, generating two classes of Ab, Ab40 and Ab42 (Nunan and Small 2000;Selkoe 2001). The identity of c secretase is still unknown (Nunan and Small 2000;Selkoe 2001), but the existence of two forms of Ab peptide, ending either with residue 40 or 42 of its C-terminus, suggests the action of at least two different c secretases (Citron et al. 1996). The existence of two c secretases was supported by a recent study demonstrating that a specific cysteine protease inhibitor E-64d inhibits production of Ab40 with concomitant increased production of Ab42, while the dipeptidyl aldehydes, which are inhibitors of both cysteine and serine proteases, inhibit production of both forms of Ab (Figueiredo-Pereira et al. 1999). Accordingly, a cysteine protease may activate 'c40 secretase' activity, while a serine protease might activate 'c42 secretase' activity (Figueiredo-Pereira et al. 1999). Because CC inhibits cysteine proteinases with a profile similar to that of E-64d, CC participation in AbPP processing may induce inhibition of a c40 secretase action with a relative increase of c42 secretase. Indeed, our recent experiments (Vattemi et al. 2003) indicate that Ab42 is more abundantly expressed in s-IBM muscle fibers than Ab40, and the present study demonstrated that all Ab42 immunoreactive muscle fibers were CC-immunopositive. Accordingly, we propose that in s-IBM muscle, CC, in conjunction with the previously demonstrated increased BACE1, BACE2 and presenilin1 (Askanas et al. 1998;Vattemi et al. 2001), and accompanying the increased AbPP transcription (Sarkozi et al. 1993;Askanas and Engel 2002), contributes to abnormal AbPP processing leading to Ab accumulation, especially of the more toxic Ab42.

Whether CC facilitates Ab fibrillogenesis in s-IBM muscle fibers is not known. However, in s-IBM muscle fibers CC immunoreactivity is more abundant than that of Ab, suggesting its possibly early role in Ab accumulation and, possibly, Ab fibrillogenesis. Both Ab and CC independently have amyloidogenic properties (Janowski et al. 2001;Staniforth et al. 2001); whether, by itself, it can do so under biological conditions in living muscle fibers is not known. At physiological concentration under denaturing conditions, acidic pH and high temperature, human CC tends to dimerize (Ekiel and Abrahamson 1996) and may form aggregates through a three-dimensional domain-swapping mechanism (Janowski et al. 2001;Staniforth et al. 2001). Ab, in addition to forming amyloid fibrils, also has tendency to form dimers and oligomers (Lambert et al. 2001). Co-deposition of Ab and CC has been reported as a component of the vascular amyloid in HCHWA-Dutch type due to AbPP mutation as well as in HCHWA-Icelandic type due to CC mutation, and in sporadic AD senile plaques (Ghiso et al. 1986;Haan and Roos 1992;Levy et al. 2001). Accordingly, it was proposed that CC either binds to Ab amyloid fibrils, and/or it facilitates Ab fibrillinogenesis (Levy et al. 2001) -our data suggest that these mechanisms could be operative in s-IBM muscle fibers and in cultured muscle fibers overexpressing AbPP.

Our immunoblotting study also demonstrated that in s-IBM muscle, in addition to being accumulated in foci, CC is quantitatively increased. Under experimental conditions, different factors, including transforming growth factor-beta 1 and oxidative stress, can increase CC expression in various cells (Nishio et al. 2000;Afonso et al. 2002). Since several aspects of oxidative stress (Askanas and Engel 2002) and increased TGF-beta1 (Mirabella et al. 1994) are evident in the s-IBM muscle fibers, it is possible that they contribute to the increase of CC in s-IBM muscle fibers.

The significance of CC being present on the amyloid-like fibrils at the periphery of the collections of IBM-PHFs (but not within the PHF collections) is not known. It is conceivable that CC may be modulating fibrillinogenesis of phosphorylated tau, known to be an amyloidogenic protein in both s-IBM muscle and AD brain (Mirabella et al. 1996 and referenced therein), and/or it may be enhancing tau phosphorylation, since experimental inhibition of cysteine proteases cathepsin B and L resulted in the extra-lysosomal formation of hyperphosphorylated tau (Bi et al. 1999).

A role of diffusely increased CC immunoreactivity in muscle fibers undergoing necrosis in polymyositis, dermatomyositis and morphologically non-specific myopathies is presently unknown. Possibly, it may reflect a mechanism by which cells attempt to protect themselves against increased levels of cysteine proteases-a mechanism also possibly occurring in s-IBM fibers.

In regenerating muscle fibers in all myopathies and in cultured normal human muscle, CC may influence muscle fiber growth and repair, possibly similarly to its previously demonstrated role in the maturation of dendritic cells and in proliferation of neural stem cells (Pierre and Mellman 1998;Taupin et al. 2000). This, too, might be occurring to some extent in s-IBM muscle fibers. But the multiple focal accumulations of CC (plus Ab) do not occur in the nonspecifically regenerating or necrotic muscle fibers. A role of cystatin C at the postsynaptic domain of neuromuscular junctions (NMJs) is not presently known, but it may suggest a novel role of its protecting some junctional proteins against their destruction by cysteine proteases. In addition, because AbPP mRNA and its protein immunoreactivity are increased at the postsynaptic domain of the human NMJs (Askanas et al. 1992;Sarkozi et al. 1993), the strong accumulation of CC there may suggest its participation in the AbPP processing there.

Conclusions

We report a novel physical interaction between cystatin C and AbPP in s-IBM muscle and in normal cultured human muscle fibers experimentally overexpressing AbPP. We suggest that cystatin C may participate in amyloid-b deposition and fibrillogenesis and could have an important pathogenetic role in s-IBM muscle. In addition, our studies demonstrate for the first time that cystatin C is might be playing a role in muscle fiber growth, repair and necrosis, and in maintaining postsynaptic proteins.

Acknowledgements

Maggie Baburyan provided excellent technical assistance in electronmicroscopy and photography. Supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (AG16768) and the Muscular Dystrophy Association (both to VA).

Fig. 11Fig. 1 Immunofluorescence in s-IBM muscle. (a-f) Double-label immunofluorescence illustrates that in s-IBM muscle fibers large plaque-like cystatin C (CC) immunoreactive inclusions (a and d) colocalized with amyloid-b deposition (Ab) (b and e), except that CC boundaries (orange color outside the yellow color in the double-exposed photographs in (c) and (f), extended beyond the Ab deposition

Fig. 22Fig. 2 Double-label immunofluorescence in a morphologically-nonspecific myopathy (a-e). Two small regenerating muscle fibers, identified by strong desmin (Des) immunoreactivity (b), have diffusely increased CC immunoreactivity (a). A small necrotizing muscle fiber identified by negative desmin immunoreactivity (d) is strongly CC

Fig. 44Fig.4Immunoblots and immunoprecipitation (representation of three normal-control and three s-IBM samples). (a) Immunoblots of muscle homogenates of normal-control (C) and s-IBM muscle biopsies demonstrate in s-IBM a much stronger expression of cystatin C, which migrates as a 14-kDa band. The actin band shows the protein loading in each specimen. (b) Immunoprecipitation of control and s-IBM muscle biopsies with anticystatin C antibody, followed by immunoprobing with 6E10 antibody. This reveals a strong 130-kDa band corresponding to AbPP in s-IBM muscle, while the control does not express any band. (c) Immunoprecipitation of control and s-IBM muscle with anti-amyloid-a antibody 6E10, followed by immunoblotting and probing with anticystatin C antibody. This reveals a 14-kDa band corresponding to cystatin C in s-IBM muscle, while the control does not express any band. (d) (upper panel) Cytoplasm of a 3-week culture

Fig. 33Fig.3Gold-immuno-electronmicroscopy in s-IBM muscle fibers. (ac) single-label immunostaining using 10 (a) or 5 (b and c) nm gold particles illustrates that CC is mainly localized to 6-10 nm amyloid-like fibrils (a) and floccular material (b). In (c), CC is present on 6-10 nm amyloid-like fibrils, apparently attached to a bundle of paired helical

14714159, 2003, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1046/j.1471-4159.2003.01798.x by University Of Illinois At Urbana Champaign, Wiley Online Library on [07/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

