Inclusion body myositis in a patient with a presumed diagnosis of post-polio syndrome

Inclusion body myositis in a patient with a presumed diagnosis of post-polio syndrome

Sirs: Sporadic inclusion body myositis (IBM) is a distinctive form of inflammatory myopathy and an important cause of progressive muscle wasting and weakness in later life [7]. Post-polio syndrome is defined as "the development of new muscle weakness and fatigue in skeletal or bulbar muscles, unrelated to any known medical cause, that begins 25-30 years after an acute attack of paralytic poliomyelitis" [4]. Searching the literature we found only two cases of pathologically confirmed inclusion body myositis in patients with a known history of paralytic poliomyelitis [1,9]. In this letter we describe a similar case and discuss the data, which can lead to the reliable differential diagnosis between inclusion body myositis and postpoliomyelitis muscular atrophy.

A farmer, aged 61 years, was referred to our department because of painless muscular weakness in his lower legs and right arm; his left arm had been severely paretic and atrophic since the age of 3 years following an acute attack of paralytic poliomyelitis. The new symptoms had started six months ago and there was progressive disability. At the time of the referral the patient could not rise from a chair and climb stairs without support.

Neurological examination revealed muscular weakness mainly localized in the quadriceps femoris muscles (Medical Research Council Grade 2) and tibialis anterior in the lower limbs bilaterally, as well as in the deltoid, biceps brachii and deep finger flexor in the right arm (MRC Grade 3). Muscle tone and tendon reflexes were diffusely depressed. Severe atrophy was obvious in the quadriceps femoris. Sensory examination proved normal and the Babinski sign was not elicited.

Routine laboratory tests showed mild elevation of creatine kinase (CK). The immunological profile of the patient was not normal; there were polyclonal hyperglobulinemia, positive titer of antinuclear antibodies (ANA) and low values of C4 complement indicating an autoimmune disorder. However, after an extensive review of the laboratory tests, the patient did not meet the criteria of any autoimmune disease. Needle electromyography of proximal (e. g. deltoid, vastus medialis) and distal muscles (tibialis anterior) of the right upper and the lower limbs revealed abnormal spontaneous activity, consisting of numerous fibrillation potentials and trains of positive sharp waves; additionally there was an excess of small amplitude and short duration polyphasic motor unit action potentials. Recruitment pattern was full with low amplitude potentials, indicating some kind of myopathic disorder. The electrophysiological findings in the left upper limb were compatible with a longstanding neurogenic disorder.

An open muscle biopsy was performed on the right quadriceps (vastus medialis) muscle. In multiple frozen as well as paraffin sections of the skeletal muscle, a dense inflammatory infiltration and fibrosis of the endomysium was profound (Fig. 1). The inflammatory cells were mainly lymphocytes and most of them were T cells (Fig. 2). A variation of fiber size with large and small rounded fibers as well as degenerated fibers with or without phagocytosis was frequent. Other myopathic features, such as internal nuclei, splitting or ring fibers were also found. In some of the larger ones, phagocytosis without necrosis was obvious (Fig. 3). In a small number of muscle fibers one or more vacuoles with granular material were easily recognizable. This granular material was stained red by trichrome Gomori (Fig. 4). There were no signs of denervation or reinnervation. The morphology of this muscle biopsy specimen was consistent with inclusion body myositis. Unfortunately, an electron microscopic study of the muscle specimen was not performed.

Treatment with prednisolone per os (0,75 mg/kg/day) was started tapering to a low maintenance dose after a period of 3 to 6 weeks combined with azathioprine 150 mg daily. In the follow-up after 3 months the assesment of muscle function in selected upper and lower limb muscle groups showed no further deterioration of the muscle strength.

We believe that our patient suffered from inclusion body myositis and not from post-poliomyelitis muscle atrophy (PPMA) as originally was thought. At first, the selective pattern of muscle involvement in both the upper and lower limbs and especially the finding of knee extensor weakness that exceeded hip flexor weakness as well as finger flexor weakness were highly suggestive of inclusion body myositis. Our patient had also a progression of his symptoms noticeable in months, which is not consistent with the extremely slow course of PPMA. Moreover, new post-polio symptoms appear to begin after a mean period of approximately 30 years (range, 15 to 55) after the original attack of acute LETTER TO THE EDITORS JON 1046 paralytic poliomyelitis [4]; the age of the patient is beyond this age range, while it is a common age of onset in cases of inclusion body myositis.

Despite the fact that the majority of patients with inclusion body myositis fail to respond to conventional forms of immunotherapy, a few patients may improve slightly or cease worsening with steroids [7]. The partial response of our patient to steroids and azathioprine gives further support to the diagnosis of an underlying inflammatory myopathy. Furthermore, these drugs have no influence on the disease progression of post-poliomyelitis muscular atrophy.

The mild elevation of creatine kinase level noticed in our case indicates the presence of an inflammatory myopathy, but it is by no means a specific finding, since it has also been described in the post-polio syndrome [3].

The electromyographic findings support our clinical impression that the patient suffered from an inflammatory myopathy, while the typical ongoing denervation and reinnervation pattern of PPMA was absent. It is worth mentioning that a combination of myopathic and neuropathic features is common in cases of inclusion body myositis and may cause diagnostic confusion whenever a neurogenic disease, such as post-polio syndrome, is considered.

A serious diagnostic problem may also arise in the evaluation of the muscle biopsy findings, because some patients with post-polio syndrome (i. e. a chronic neurogenic condition) demonstrate in previously affected muscles, histological and immunoelectron mi- croscopic features, similar to those found in inclusion body myositis [5,10]. In our patient, however, the biopsy findings indicative of that myopathy were derived from a muscle, which had not been affected by paralytic poliomyelitis. Moreover, the moderate endomysial inflammation seen in this case is common in inclusion body myositis but absent in the post-polio patients. Semino-Mora and Dalakas have suggested that the chronicity, rather than the cause of the underlying disease, may play a role in the vacuolar formation and the endomyofibrillar deposition of amyloid and ubiquinated filaments, which are observed in diverse entities, such as IBM, oculopharyngeal muscle dystrophy and post-polio syndrome [10].

Electron microscopy (EM) would be ideal for the definite diagnosis of IBM, demonstrating the typical 15-18 nm tubulofilaments of the disease. Despite our inability to provide EM data, our patient can be diagnosed as having possible IBM, according to the published criteria for IBM [6]. Moreover, two recent reports have emphasized, that some patients with clinical features of inclusion body myositis but lacking the histopathological confirmation (usually early in the course of the illness) may nonetheless have the disease [2,8].

In summary, we believe that one could reliably detect cases of inclusion body myositis among adults who had had childhood polio by studying all the clinical, neurophysiological and histopathological data. This is a matter of practical importance, since these patients have some potential for responding to the therapeutic regimens available. Finally, it appears most likely that the coexistence of both disorders in our patient represents a mere coincidence, since there are no sufficient data to support any direct relationship between them.

s Acknowledgment The authors thank Dimitris Karakostas MD for his help in the preparation of this manuscript.

Fig. 1 Fig. 2 Fig. 3 Fig. 41234Fig. 1 Inclusion body myositis. Fibrosis and dense inflammatory infiltrate of the endomysium. H.E. X100

