Inclusion body myositis evolving in systemic lupus erythrematosus? A case report

of a patient with systemic lupus erythrematosus (SLE)associated myositis who went on to develop IBM w1x. We present a second case supporting the hypothesis that at least some cases of IBM are immunologically derived.

In 1981 a 58-yr-old women presented with a 9 month history of malaise, arthralgia and dryness of the eyes. Investigations showed neutropenia (1.49 310 9 ul), positive antinuclear antibodies with speckled pattern (1:640), positive DNA binding >160 IUuml (0-25), and positive Ro and La antibodies. A diagnosis of SLE and associated Sjogren's syndrome was made. The patient was treated with hydroxychloroquine and oral steroids. In 1988 she developed severe muscle pain and weakness and her creatine phosphokinase (CPK) was high, ranging from 370 to 602 IUul (24-170). The patient's EMG and an open muscle biopsy from the vastus medialis showed evidence of mild myositis without features of IBM. This was treated with azathioprine and later cyclosporin. The patient showed scant improvement; however, compliance with medication was poor. She had a severe exacerbation of her myositis in 1996 with progressive weakness. A repeat immunological screen showed the presence of the aforementioned autoantibodies. However, the patient's Jo1 antibodies were negative and a repeat muscle biopsy from the vastus medialis showed nercotizing myositis (Fig. 1), and this required treatment with intravenous methylpredinsolone. She became progressively weaker in her peripheral muscles, especially the small muscles of her hands, and ran a bearly elevated CPK of 150-190 IUul. At this stage a further open muscle biopsy from the same muscle demonstrated chronic myopathic changes with prominent fibrosis and presence of rimmed vacuoles, suggesting a diagnosis of IBM. This did not respond to treatment with intramuscular methotrexate 25 mg weekly. In May 2001 a further muscle biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of IBM as evidenced by the classical electron microscopic features of this disorder including the presence of membranous whorls and the tubulo filamentous inclusions (Fig. 2).

The patient has recently been treated with intravenous immunoglobulins and managed to achieve a reasonable recovery in her muscle strength and functional status.

IBM is defined as an idiopathic inflammatory myopathy w2, 3x. IBM is very resistant to the conventional immunosuppressive treatment. Muscle weakness continued to progress in patients who were treated with steroid, azathioprine and methotrexate w8-10x. However, significant improvement of muscle strength and functional status were observed in a recent study using intermittent intravenous immunoglobulins w11x.

It is possible that in this patient IBM evolved from autoimmune polymyositis. This assumption is based on the patient's clinical course, the serological findings, which were in keeping with a diagnosis of SLE, and the progressive histological changes that were seen in her sequential muscle biopsies. The observation that the patient's muscle disease became progressively more resistant to the standard immunosuppressive treatment, including azathioprine, methotrexate and cyclosporin, also supports this hypothesis. The later improvement in her muscle strength after treatment with intravenous immunoglobulins is consistent with results of the recent trials, which have focused on this treatment w11x.

There are some similarities between this case and the previously reported patient who had developed an IBM on a background of SLE associated myositis. However, in the previous case there was no pathological confirmation that the initial myositis had any of the characteristic features of IBM. In both cases IBM developed several years after the onset of symptoms, once the patient reached the age of 50 yr, lending to support the hypothesis that IBM may occur as a reaction of 'ageing' muscle to the same types of immunological stimuli that initiate polymyositis w12x. These findings could argue that muscle biopsy should be undertaken more readily in atypical cases of Lupus-associated myositis. IBM may start to become a more common complication. Correspondence to: G. Massawi. E-mail: gmassawi@ aol.com

G. MASSAWI, P. HICKLING, D.HILTON 1 , C. PATTERSON Departments of Rheumatology, and 1 Histopathology, Derriford Hospital, Plymouth, UK Accepted 19 December 2002

Adams histologically described IBM for the first time in the mid-1960s as a form of myopathy with cellular inclusions w2x. In 1971, IBM was identified FIG. 2. Electron micrograph illustrating 15 nm tubulofilmentous structures, characteristic of IBM.Letters to the Editor1013as a distinct disorder that could be differentiated fromother idiopathic inflammatory myopathies such as poly-myositis and dermatomyositis by the presence of fibrescontaining inclusions that contain amyloid-like depositsw4, 5x. IBM is present in 15-28% of patients with idio-pathic inflammatory myositis w6x. It primarily affects menand the age of onset is typically 50 yr or older. The muscleweakness in IBM is classically insidious and slowlyprogressive, unlike other forms of myositis, often showsprominent involvement of the distal muscles. Myalgiasare present in 40% of patients with IBM w7x, and muscleatrophy progresses according to disease duration andseverity of muscle weakness. Muscle enzymes are typic-ally normal or barely elevated. Muscle biopsy is charac-terized by the presence of basophilic-rimmed vacuolesand the adjacent eosinophillic inclusions, which are seenwithin the muscle fibre sarcoplasm. However, the defini-tive diagnostic feature is the presence of filamentousinclusions and vacuoles on electron microscopy w5x.

