Inclusion Body Myositis: Clonal Expansions of Muscle-Infiltrating T Cells Persist Over Time

Inclusion body myositis (IBM) is a chronic inflammatory myopathy. The muscle histology is characterized by infiltration of T cells, which invade and apparently destroy muscle fibres. This study was performed to investigate whether predominant clones of muscle-infiltrating T cells are identical in different muscles and whether they persist over time in IBM. By reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, 25 T-cell receptor (TCR) variable b (Vb) chain families and the complementarity-determining region 3 (CDR3) of the TCR were analysed in two different muscle biopsies of four patients with IBM. In two of the patients, the muscle biopsies were obtained from different muscles at one time point, whereas in two patients, the second biopsy was obtained 9 years after the first biopsy. T cells expressing predominant Vb families were analysed for clonality by fragment length analysis of the CDR3. Predominant Vb families were analysed by DNA sequencing to identify identical clones. Immunohistochemical staining of Vb families was performed to study the distribution of T cells expressing identified predominant Vb families. The muscle-infiltrating lymphocytes showed restricted expression of TCR Vb families. DNA sequencing proved that clonally expanded T cells were identical in different muscles and persisted 9 years after the first biopsy. Immunohistochemical analysis with Vb family-specific antibodies demonstrated the endomysial localization of these T cells in inflammatory cell infiltrates. Our results show that in IBM there is clonal restriction of TCR expression in muscle-infiltrating lymphocytes. Identical T-cell clones predominate in different muscles, and these clones persist for many years. These results indicate an important, continuous, antigen-driven inflammatory reaction in IBM.

Introduction

Inclusion body myositis (IBM) is a chronic, progressive, inflammatory muscle disease mainly affecting individuals older than 50 years [1]. Clinically, IBM is characterized by proximal and distal muscle weakness and wasting, frequently accompanied by dysphagia [2,3]. IBM, after several years of slowly progressive course, is a severely disabling disorder and there is no curative treatment. Muscle morphology is characterized by inflammatory cell infiltrates, which invade and apparently destroy non-necrotic muscle fibres [4][5][6]. In addition, there are rimmed vacuoles and congophilic inclusions in muscle fibres [7]. Deposits of 15-18 nm of tubulo-filaments are present in cytoplasm and nuclei. Accumulation of various proteins have been described in association with the rimmed vacuoles [8].

In spite of resistance to immunosuppressive treatment, there is evidence that the inflammatory reaction is important in IBM [9]. The inflammatory cells are mainly composed of T cells and macrophages, and non-necrotic muscle fibres are invaded by inflammatory cells, most of which are CD8 þ T cells [4]. Muscle fibres invaded by T cells are several times more frequent than fibres displaying other pathologic alterations such as congophilic inclusions [10]. A large proportion of the autoinvasive CD8 þ T cells are human leucocyte antigen-DR (HLA-DR)-positive suggesting that they are activated [11]. All invaded muscle cells express HLA class I antigen on their surface, which is consistent with a major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I-restricted cytotoxic cell-mediated attack on muscle fibres. Inflammatory cell-infiltrates in IBM exhibit a restricted expression of the variable a/b (Va/b) chain families of the T-cell receptor (TCR) [12][13][14], and there are clonal expansions of muscle-infiltrating T cells [15][16][17].

If specific antigens in muscle trigger the inflammatory reaction, it would be expected that T cell-expressing identical TCRs are expressed in all muscles and also persist over time. In this study, we investigated the predominant T-cell clones of muscle-infiltrating lymphocytes in different muscles obtained at one time point and in repeat muscle biopsies obtained 9 years apart. The results show that the TCR expression is restricted and that predominant T-cell clones are identical in different muscles and persist for many years.

Materials and methods

Patients. Muscle specimens from four patients with IBM were studied. The patients had progressive muscle weakness and the diagnostic changes of definite IBM, according to Griggs et al. [18]. A summary of clinical data is summarized in Table 1. The muscle tissue specimens were obtained by open biopsy and immediately frozen in a mixture of propane and propylene chilled by liquid nitrogen and kept at À85 C until analysed. Specimens from two different mus-cles were obtained at the same time point in patient 1 and 2. In patient 3 and 4, the two muscle biopsies were obtained with a time interval of 9 years.

Polymerase chain reaction and fragment analysis. Total RNA from muscle tissue was extracted by using the SV Total RNA Isolation System (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). First strand cDNA was synthesized by Ready To Go you-prime first-strand beads with molony murine leukaemia virus (M-MuLV) reverse transcriptase and the oligonucleotide pd(T) 12À18 as primer (Pharmacia Amersham Biotech, Uppsala, Sweden). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis of the complementarity-determining region 3 (CDR3) using 25 different Vb family-specific primers was performed as previously described [16]. Predominant Vb families in both muscles from each case were selected for further analysis of the CDR3 region by fragment analysis using a Cb primer conjugated to the fluorescent dye 6-FAM (KEBO Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden) as previously described [16]. The labelled PCR products were loaded on a 5.75% polyacrylamide-sequencing gel (Long Ranger Singel Packs, FMC Bioproducts, Rockland, Maine, UK) and run on an automated DNA sequencer (Model 377 DNA Sequencer, Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) to separate CDR3 fragments of various length. The results were analysed by GeneScan TM Analysis software (Perkin Elmer, Foster City, CA, USA). As the positions of the Vb and the Cb primers were fixed, the length distribution observed in the PCR products only depended on the size of the CDR3 region, which was set according to Moss [19].

Cloning and sequencing. Predominant PCR products of the different Vb families were further analysed by sequencing to identify identical clones. The PCR fragments were sequenced directly or after subcloning with TOPO TA Cloning Kit, Dual Promoter (Invitogen BV, Groningen, The Netherlands). The plasmid inserts of randomly selected colonies were amplified by PCR and then purified using Micro Spin columns (Pharmacia Amersham Biotech). Automatic sequencing was performed with a 377 DNA Sequencer (Applied Biosystems) using ABI PRISM BigDye TM Terminator Cycle Sequencing Ready Reaction Kit (PE Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions.

Immunohistochemical staining of Vb families. Cryostat sections were fixed in cold acetone for 5 min, washed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and treated with 0.3% H 2 O 2 for 5 min. They were then incubated in PBS with 4% PBS/bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 10 min followed by incubation with a mouse monoclonal antibody to Vb8 or Vb5.1 (Beckman-Coulter, Bromma, Sweden) diluted 1 : 200 in 1% PBS/BSA for 1 h. After rinsing in PBS, the sections were treated with a biotinylated rabbit antimouse secondary antibody for 30 min (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark). The binding of biotinylated antibodies was detected following stepwise incubation with avidin-biotin-peroxidase complexes (Dako) and 3,3 0 -diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride as a chromogen.

Results

A restricted usage of Vb families in muscle-infiltrating lymphocytes was found in all eight examined muscle biopsies. The results from patient 1 are illustrated in Fig. 1. One or more Vb family predominated in both muscle samples of each patient, and these were chosen for analysis of oligoclonal expansions by fragment size analysis. The results of the selected and analysed Vb families in patient 1 (Vb2, 4, 6, 8, 14 and 18) are illustrated in Fig. 2. In this patient, the Vb8 family showed an oligoclonal pattern in both muscles, whereas the other Vb families showed a polyclonal pattern. In patients 2-4, a similar variability was observed. We then characterized the predominant CDR3 of TCR Vb8 in patients 1, 2 and 4, the Vb5.1 in patients 2 and 3 and Vb6 in patient 3 by DNA sequencing. The results show that identical T-cell clones were present in both investigated muscles of all four patients. The deduced amino acid sequences of the identified clones are presented in Fig. 3. To study the localization of the investigated T cells within the tissue, we performed immunohistochemical analysis using Vb family-specific antibodies. We found that Vb8-expressing T cells of patient 1 and 4 and the Vb5.1-expressing T cells of patient 2 and 3 were present at high frequency in endomysial T-cell infiltrates (Fig. 4).

Discussion

In this study, we have demonstrated that muscle-infiltrating T cells show restricted Vb TCR expression and expansion of Tcell clones that are identical in different muscles and persist over very long time in patients with IBM.

TCR expression of muscle-infiltrating T cells has previously been studied in single muscle biopsies in IBM and polymyositis (PM) by analysis of the TCR Vb repertoire and the CDR3. Results from such studies have demonstrated restricted usage of Vb families [12-14, 20, 21] and clonal expansions of T cells in muscle in IBM and PM [15][16][17]22]. The preferentially expressed Vb families varied between different studies and also between individual patients. However, Vb1, 3, 5.1, 5.2, 6 and 8 were reported as being frequently expressed [12][13][14][15][16][17]22]. The pattern of Vb family expression in muscle-infiltrating lymphocytes is different from peripheral blood [12]. presented by MHC I-expressing muscle cells. In addition, Bender et al. [17] showed that the autoinvasive T cells were clonally restricted, whereas the noninvasive interstitial T cells were clonally diverse in IBM, providing further evidence for an antigen-driven MHC-restricted immune response.

Such restricted Vb family expression and clonal expansions of T cells in muscle in IBM and PM indicate an antigendriven immune response with a limited number of antigens

Specific stimulation of naive T cells requires TCR interaction with an antigen presented by MHC class I or II, interaction between CD28 on T cells with costimulatory molecules belonging to the B7 family and other factors. Mature muscle cells do not express B7-1/B7-2 neither normally nor in inflammatory myopathies [23], but another functional costimulatory molecule (BB-1) has been demonstrated to be expressed by muscle fibers in inflammatory myopathies including IBM [24,25]. This finding indicates that muscle cells may act as antigenpresenting cells to T cells with specific TCR rearrangements.

Because there is no efficient immunosuppressive treatment of IBM, the concept of IBM as an autoimmune disease has been debated. The importance of the inflammatory reaction in the pathogenesis of IBM is supported 

Vβ2

V β4 V β6 V β8 V β14 Vβ18 by several observations. Non-necrotic muscle fibres invaded by T cells are several-fold more frequent than fibres displaying other pathologic alterations such as congophilic inclusions [10]. Upregulation of MHC class I is consistently found in IBM muscle biopsies irrespective of presence or absence of inflammatory cell infiltration [26]. In addition, several genetic studies on IBM have shown a strong association with the HLA-DR3 haplotype [27][28][29], supporting the concept that autoimmunity is important in the pathogenesis of IBM. The mechanisms by which the T cells destroy the muscle fibres are not known. There are two major pathways of T-cell-mediated cell death. One is the perforin/granzyme pathway and the other is the Fas/Fas ligand pathway [30]. Both mechanisms may act by induction of apoptosis. In polymyositis and IBM, perforin-positive cells have been demonstrated in association with invasion of non-necrotic muscle fibres [31,32]. Fas is not normally expressed by muscle fibres but is expressed by muscle fibres in IBM and PM [33,34]. However, apoptosis of muscle cells has not been shown to be of significance in IBM and PM [33,[35][36][37], although a recent study indicates that apoptosis occurs in muscle cells in inflammatory myopathies [38]. Cytokines that are expressed or induced by the inflammatory cells may also be important in the pathogenesis of muscle fibre atrophy and destruction [39][40][41].

In chronic inflammatory diseases like IBM, it is probable that the T-cell usage eventually becomes more diverse. In experimental allergic encephalomyelitis, there is initially a restricted T-cell usage, which eventually becomes more diverse, although the initial pathogenic T-cell clones remain and predominate in the inflammatory cell infiltrate [42]. We found that the predominant T-cell clones in muscle-infiltrating lymphocytes persisted for at least 9 years. This is in accordance with a report where three IBM patients were followed for up to 22 months [43]. This finding strongly indicates that a limited number of important antigens continuously drive the inflammatory reaction in IBM leading to progressive muscle destruction and weakness. Identification of the antigens recognized by these T-cell clones would give important insights in the pathogenesis of IBM. 

A B C D

Acknowledgments

This study was supported by grants from the Swedish Medical Research Council (Proj. no. 7122), King Gustav V 80th Anniversary Fund, the Swedish Rheumatism Association and the Go ¨teborg Medical Society. Professor Lennart Rydberg is acknowledged for valuable help with HLA typing.

Figure 11Figure1Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis of T-cell receptor variable b (Vb) family usage in muscle-infiltrating lymphocytes from patient 1 with inclusion body myositis and in peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) from a healthy control. The different Vb families are indicated above each lane. There is a restricted but variable usage of the different Vb families. Some of the Vb families appear as strong bands in both muscles, e.g. Vb2, 4, 6, 8, 14 and 18.

Figure 33Figure 3  Results from DNA sequencing of reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction amplified fragments of predominant variable b families. Direct sequencing and/or subcloning before sequencing shows that there are identical T-cell clones in the different muscle specimens in each patient. The results are given as deduced amino acid sequences of the complementarity-determining region 3 (CDR3). In patient 3 and 4, there are 9 years between the 1st and 2nd biopsy in each case. The figure includes only clones that were identified in two different muscles or at two different occasions.

Figure 22Figure 2 Spectratyping of predominant variable b (Vb) families in patient 1. Vb8 shows only one peak in both muscles, indicating that the Vb8-expressing T cells in both muscles include one predominant clone.

Figure 44Figure 4 Haematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining (A and C) and immunohistochemical staining of the T cells expressing T-cell receptor variable b 8 (Vb8) chain (B and D) that were found to be predominant and oligoclonal in patient 1 (A and B) and 4 (C and D). The analysis shows that the Vb8-expressing T cells are located in endomysial inflammatory cell infiltrates. Bars correspond to 10 mm.

Table 11Clinical and morphological data on the inclusion body myositis (IBM) patients included in the studyDuration ofGenderAgesymptomsMain clinicalDegree of musclePatient(M/F)(years)(years)findingsCK* TreatmentinflammationHLA1M674Weakness of elbow10NoneBiceps: moderateHLA-A*02flexion and long fingerinflammation.B*08,51flexors. QuadricepsQuadriceps femoris:DRB1*03,11muscle atrophysevere inflammation2M605Severe weakness of15NoneDeltoid:HLA-A*03,33long finger flexors.moderate inflammation.B*14,51Moderate weakness inQuadriceps femoris:DRB1*01,03knee extension, hipmoderate inflammationflexion and neck flexion3F606Weakness in knee3.0 NoneDeltoid: moderateHLA-A*03,26;extension, hip flexioninflammationB*07,51and finger flexion.DRB1*01,13Swallowing difficulties6915Severe weakness in1.4 Prednisone since ageDeltoid: slightknee extension, hip60. Dosage: 15 mg/2inflammationflexion and finger flexion.days since age 66.Moderate to severeMethotrexateswallowing difficulties5 mg/weeksince age 684M732Weakness in knee14NoneGastrocnemius:HLA-A*03,29;extension, hipsevere inflammationB*07,44flexion and finger flexionDRB1*11,138211Severe weakness in4.5 Prednisone sinceDeltoid:knee extension, hipage 73. Dosage:severe inflammationflexion and finger10 mg/3 daysflexion. Moderate proximalsince age 80weakness in upper extremities*Creatine kinase; mkat/l, normal value <3.5. HLA, human leucocyte antigen.

