Transthyretin Val122Ile, accumulated A␤, and inclusion-body myositis aspects in cultured muscle

8. Communication Consult request delayed Page not returned in timely fashion Requisitions "not received" 9. Misc. Delayed diagnostic test Wt based medication ordered without known wt 10. Other B. Consequence of error Near miss (no impact on patient) Some patient discomfort Prolonged hospital stay Additional diagnostic studies needed Medical condition worsening Acute intervention required Patient needed transfer to ICU Death Other References 1. Institute of Medicine. To err is human: building a safer health system.

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM), the most common progressive muscle disease of older persons, is of unknown etiology and pathogenesis. Characteristic features of the s-IBM muscle biopsy are vacuolated muscle fibers containing Congo red-positive amyloid inclusions and various degrees of lymphocytic inflammation. 1 Morphologic abnormalities within s-IBM muscle fibers exhibit many similarities to Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain, including accumulations of the cytotoxic amyloid ␤-peptide (A␤), clusters of tau-containing paired helical filaments, and a dozen other proteins accumulated in AD brain. 1 In the aging cellular environment, the intra-muscle fiber increase of A␤ has been considered upstream to other cellular abnormalities of the s-IBM pathogenic cascade. 1 We postulated that s-IBM is a multifactorial disease in which susceptibility genes, possibly together with predisposing environmental factors, play an important pathogenetic role. 1 Recently, we reported a 70-year-old African-American man with s-IBM and cardiac amyloidosis associated with the Val122Ile transthyretin (TTR) mutation, 2 typically autosomal dominant. 3 In addition to the features of s-IBM, his muscle biopsy contained 1) numerous intra-muscle fiber plaquettes of congophilic amyloid composed of both TTR and A␤ 2 and 2) muscle blood vessel extracellular amyloid also composed of both TTR and A␤. 2 Because wild TTR in vitro binds A␤ and prevents its fibrillar amyloidogenesis, 4 we hypothesized that, conversely, mutant TTR may promote A␤ deposition and amyloidogenesis, thereby facilitating development of IBM. To test this hypothesis, we cultured our patient's muscle biopsy and transferred into his cultured muscle fibers (CMF) the 751 amyloid ␤ precursor protein gene (A␤PP) gene, seeking whether their intrinsic TTR mutation will facilitate their development of the IBM phenotype. We previously reported that transfer of the A␤PP gene into human normal CMF produced some aspects of the IBM phenotype, including accumulation of A␤-immunoreactive inclusions and rare congophilia. 5 Materials and methods. Muscle cultures. Human muscle was cultured in monolayer from satellite cells of portions of diagnostic muscle biopsies, per our method. 5 Muscle cultures from the patient's Val122Ile TTR muscle were compared with cultures grown in parallel from muscle biopsies of four age-matched control patients and several previously grown muscles of patients who were considered free of muscle disease after all diagnostic tests were performed.

A␤PP gene transfer. A 3-kb human 751 A␤PP cDNA was transferred into 2-week-old CMF, using a replication-deficient adenovirus (RDAV) vector at 0.3 ϫ 10 8 pfu/mL of culture medium, as described previously. 5 The same dose of RDAV carrying antisense A␤PP cDNA or the ␤-galactosidase gene and "empty" RDAV without any foreign cDNA other than the CMV promoter gene and the SV40 polyadenylation signal did not induce detected abnormalities in CMF. 5 Immunocytochemistry, electron microscopy, and immuno-electron microscopy. Fluorescence immunocytochemistry and electron microscopy gold immunolocalization were performed per our methods, 5 using the well-characterized mouse monoclonal antibody 6E10 against amino acids 1 to 17 of A␤ (Signet, Dedham, MA), diluted 1:200, and a rabbit polyclonal antibody against TTR (EY Laboratories, San Mateo, CA, and Novocastra, Burlingame, CA), diluted 1:50 and 1:5, respectively. 2 Congo red staining was visualized with our fluorescence-enhanced method, modified for cultured muscle. 5 Immunoblots. CMF were lysed in RIPA buffer and protein concentration measured by the Bradford method. Samples were diluted in NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen) and heated 10 minutes at 70 °C, and from each sample, 20 g of protein was loaded onto NuPAGE 12% bis-tris gels (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY). After electrophoresis, samples were transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane for 1 hour at 30 V in NuPAGE transfer buffer (Invitrogen). Nitrocellulose membranes were probed with 6E10 antibody at 10 g/mL and developed with the Western Breeze anti-mouse chemiluminescent kit (Invitrogen) for film exposure. Protein loading was evaluated with a monoclonal antibody visualizing the ␣-sarcomeric actin (Sigma, St. Louis, MO).

Results.

In contrast to the human normal CMF, which survive Ͼ8 weeks and are often cross-striated (figure 1A), the Val122Ile TTR CMF survived only 2 to 3 weeks owing to their pronounced vacuolar degeneration (see figure 1B) (data presented are estimates based on our visual inspection of the cultures). Vacuoles were in about 40% of the mutant TTR fibers vs 5% of controls. About 30% of the Val122Ile TTR CMF contained congophilic inclusions (see figure 1C) and clusters of colocalizing A␤ and TTR immunoreactivities (figure 2, A and B), whereas normal CMF did not contain congophilic or A␤-immunoreactive inclusions (see figure 2C). In normal CMF, TTR was only very slightly and diffusely immunoreactive (see figure 2D). By electron microscopy, Val122Ile TTR CMF had 1) with double-immunogold clusters of 6-to 10-nm amyloid-like fibrils and small patches of floccular material, both structures associated with both A␤ and TTR (see figure 1, D and   E); 2) abnormal mitochondria; and 3) various lysosomal inclusions (see figure 1, F and G).

Overexpression of A␤PP in the Val122Ile TTR CMF greatly increased the above abnormalities in them, and compared with A␤PP overexpression in human normal CMFs, they had 1) accelerated degeneration (3 vs 9 days); 2) pronounced congophilic amyloid inclusions (in about 60 vs 4% of the fibers) by both light and electron microscopy (not shown); 3) large colocalizing inclusions of A␤ and TTR (in about 80% of the Val122Ile fibers vs A␤ inclusions in about 60% of the normal fibers and no TTR inclusions [only diffuse staining] in them) (see figure 2, E and F); and 4) vacuoles in about 80 vs 50% of fibers. Those abnormalities were seen in all Val122Ile TTR cultures, both control and A␤PP overexpressing.

By immunoblots, all identifiable A␤ oligomers were much more abundant in A␤PP-overexpressing Val122Ile TTR CMF compared with A␤PP-overexpressing normal CMF (figure 3).

Discussion. Our study demonstrates that Val122Ile

TTR CMF express several aspects of the IBM phenotype, including accumulations of congophilia and A␤. Whereas A␤PP overexpression in normal human CMF leads to some aspects of IBM phenotype, 5 those abnormalities were greatly increased when A␤PP was overexpressed in the Val122Ile TTR CMF, especially the accumulation of the presumably cytotoxic A␤ oligomers, including their heavier, probably more aggregated forms.

Figure 1. Cultured muscle fibers. (A to C) Light microscopy. (A and B) Phase-contrast microscopy of living cultured muscle fibers. A Val122Ile transthyretin (TTR) cultured muscle fiber (CMF) is very vacuolated (B), whereas the same-age normal CMF appears healthy and partially cross-striated (A). (C) Congo red-positive inclusions present in a Val122Ile TTR CMF. Epifluorescence using the Texas Red filter system. (D to G) Electron microscopy of Val122Ile TTR muscle fibers. There are clusters of 6-to 10-nm diameter amyloid-like fibrils, "mushy" and vacuolated mitochondria, and various lysosomal inclusions. (E) Double-gold immuno-electron microscopy illustrates that amyloid-␤ (A␤) (10-nm gold particles) and TTR (5-nm gold particles

) are both associated with intermixed 6-to 10-nm amyloid-like fibrils and with small patches of amorphous floccular material. A to C, ϫ1,100; D ϫ31,000; E, ϫ63,000; F, ϫ46,000; G, ϫ46,000.

TTR is the major amyloidogenic protein in several forms of amyloidosis. 6 The Val122Ile TTR mutation is the commonest cause of cardiac amyloidosis in African Americans 3 and recently was also found in Caucasian patients with cardiac amyloidosis. 7 In Val122Ile TTR patients, extracellular TTR amyloid was in cardiac tissue, blood vessels, and other organs; muscle tissue was not examined, and A␤ was not evaluated. A relationship between the mutant TTR, A␤ accumulation, and s-IBM was previously proposed in our patient, 2 but not proven. The current study provides experimental evidence that, in human muscle, the TTR mutation predisposes to accumulation of A␤ as well as to muscle fiber vacuolation, mitochondrial abnormalities, and decreased viability. The mutant TTR also induced A␤ aggregation and A␤ oligomerization. A␤ oligomers are highly cytotoxic, producing more cellular damage than fully fibrillar A␤. 8,9 In our cultures, the Val122Ile TTR mutation itself was myotoxic, and A␤ and mutant TTR accumulating together were associated with greater toxicity.

In vitro, wild-type TTR reportedly sequestered A␤ and prevented amyloid fibril formation. 4 In cultured vascular smooth muscle cells, wild-type TTR prevented intracellular accumulation of A␤ (referenced in Askanas et al. 2 ). Wild-type TTR is increased in the hippocampus of transgenic mice bearing the A␤PP Swedish mutation 10 and is postulated to retard neuronal degeneration.

Our study strongly suggests that in human muscle, the Val122Ile TTR mutation predisposes to A␤ deposition and amyloidogenesis and increases presumably toxic intracellular A␤ oligomers. In our patient with s-IBM and Val122Ile TTR, the TTR mutation could be 1) a genetic predisposition factor for his IBM, triggered by an aging cellular environment and/or other factors; or 2) increasing a pre-existing propensity to have s-IBM and form intra-muscle fiber A␤ deposits.

We suggest that 1) the IBM histologic and clinical phenotype be sought in other patients with a TTR mutation and 2) TTR mutation/polymorphism be evaluated in patients with sporadic and hereditary IBM.   

. Double-label immunofluorescence of amyloid-␤ (A␤) and transthyretin (TTR) in cultured muscle fibers. (A to D) Three-week-old cultured fibers. Val122Ile TTR muscle fiber has a cluster of colocalizing A␤ (A) and TTR (B) immunoreactivities, whereas a control muscle fiber is A␤ negative (C) and has only very slight and diffuse TTR immunoreactivity (D). (E to H) Val122Ile TTR and control cultured muscle fibers 4 days after transfer of the A␤PP gene. Val122Ile TTR muscle fiber has strongly increased diffuse A␤ (E) and TTR (F) immunoreactivities and a large inclusion very immunoreactive with both A␤ and TTR (E,F); a control muscle fiber is diffusely immunoreactive with A␤ (G) and TTR (H) but does not contain any

Acknowledgment

The authors thank Maggie Baburyan for technical assistance.

Supported by grants from the NIH (NIA Merit Award, AG16768) and the Muscular Dystrophy Association (V.A.).

Anti-T-lymphocyte globulin treatment in inclusion body myositis

A randomized pilot study Inclusion body myositis (IBM) is an inflammatory myopathy characterized clinically by a steady progression of muscle weakness 1 with poor prognosis, 2 in which autoaggressive T cells are believed to play an important role in the pathogenesis. 3 No immunosuppressive treatment has been proven efficacious in IBM. [4][5][6][7][8] We performed an open, randomized pilot trial to evaluate the effect of anti-T-lymphocyte immunoglobulin (ATG) treatment.

Patients and methods. The morphologic criteria of IBM diagnosis included inflammation, rimmed vacuoles, and intracellular amyloid deposits or 15-to 20-nm filaments. 9 In total, 11 patients were randomized: 6 patients to the ATG group and 5 patients to the MTX group. Prednisone (10 to 30 mg every second day, dose kept unchanged) was taken by five patients in the ATG group and four in the MTX group. No other immunomodulating drugs were used. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee at the University of Gothenburg. The patients gave written informed consent.

Patients were randomized to either the MTX group, with 12 months treatment with oral methotrexate (MTX), 7.5 mg/week alone, or the ATG group, in which 5 mg/kg body weight ATG (ATG Fresenius, Fresenius HemoCare Immune Therapy GmbH, Germany) was given the first day, 4 mg/kg body weight the second day, and thereafter the dosage varied as required to keep the T-lymphocyte (CD3-expressing cell) counts between 50 and 150 ϫ 10 6 /L. The total amount of ATG given over 7 days varied between 24.8 and 30.2 mg/kg body weight. The first infusion of ATG was preceded by injection of 125 mg methylprednisolone. ATG treatment was followed by 12 months of MTX treatment (7.5 mg/week).

Six muscle functions were measured at 2 months before onset of treatment and at 0, 2, 4, 6, 9, and 12 months of treatment with a myometer (Penny & Giles Transducers Ltd., Dorset, UK) as previously described. 1 Measure of function or self-assessment was not done. An open muscle biopsy was taken just before day 0 and at 12 months. Inflammation was graded visually between 0 and 3. Laboratory investigations in blood or serum included routine tests and creatine kinase (CK, Ͻ3. 

Figure 22Figure 2. Double-label immunofluorescence of amyloid-␤ (A␤) and transthyretin (TTR) in cultured muscle fibers. (A to D) Three-week-old cultured fibers. Val122Ile TTR muscle fiber has a cluster of colocalizing A␤ (A) and TTR (B) immunoreactivities, whereas a control muscle fiber is A␤ negative (C) and has only very slight and diffuse TTR immunoreactivity (D). (E to H) Val122Ile TTR and control cultured muscle fibers 4 days after transfer of the A␤PP gene. Val122Ile TTR muscle fiber has strongly increased diffuse A␤ (E) and TTR (F) immunoreactivities and a large inclusion very immunoreactive with both A␤ and TTR (E,F); a control muscle fiber is diffusely immunoreactive with A␤ (G) and TTR (H) but does not contain anyinclusions. Pt ϭ patient; C ϭ control. ϫ1,200.

Figure 2. Double-label immunofluorescence of amyloid-␤ (A␤) and transthyretin (TTR) in cultured muscle fibers. (A to D) Three-week-old cultured fibers. Val122Ile TTR muscle fiber has a cluster of colocalizing A␤ (A) and TTR (B) immunoreactivities, whereas a control muscle fiber is A␤ negative (C) and has only very slight and diffuse TTR immunoreactivity (D). (E to H) Val122Ile TTR and control cultured muscle fibers 4 days after transfer of the A␤PP gene. Val122Ile TTR muscle fiber has strongly increased diffuse A␤ (E) and TTR (F) immunoreactivities and a large inclusion very immunoreactive with both A␤ and TTR (E,F); a control muscle fiber is diffusely immunoreactive with A␤ (G) and TTR (H) but does not contain anyinclusions. Pt ϭ patient; C ϭ control. ϫ1,200.

Figure 3 .3Figure 3. Immunoblots visualizing amyloid-␤ (A␤) oligomers in the Val122Ile transthyretin (TTR) patient (Pt) and in two sets of control (C) cultured muscle fibers, 4 days after the A␤PP gene transfer. C 2x corresponds to the same two control sets as C but after twice-longer (4 vs 2 seconds) x-ray film exposure. Actin bands (below) demonstrate protein loading in each culture group. A␤ oligomers 8 to 45 kd and above are much stronger in the Val122IleTTR cultured muscle fibers. The bands for 45 kd and higher represent more aggregated A␤ and are especially strong in the Val122Ile TTR cultured fibers.

