Light and Electron Microscopic Localization of ,B-amyloid Protein in Muscle Biopsies of Patients with Inclusion-body Myositis

In 11 of 11 inclusion-body myositis (IBM) patients, including one hereditary case, vacuolated muscle fi- bers contained large and multiple small inclusions immunoreactive for 0-amyloid protein (PAP). All IBM muscle biopsies had characteristic cytoplasmic tubulo-filaments (CTFs) by electron microscopy. None of 14 control muscle biopsies contained the PAP immunoreactive (IR) inclusions characteristic ofIBM. On the light microscopy level rAP-IR inclu- sions colocalized with ubiquitin immunoreactivity.

By immunogold electronmicroscopy, f3AP immuno- reactivity was localized to a) amorphous, poorly de- fined structures, b) dense floccular material c) clus- ters of loosely packed amyloidlike fibrils 6-8 nm in diameter, and d) poorly defined loose fibrillar struc- tures 6-8 nm in diameter. PAP immunoreactive structures were often in proximity to CTFs, but CTFs themselves never contained f3AP-IR Our study pro- vides the first demonstration of f3AP accumulations in abnormal human muscle. This finding suggests that in addition to Alzbeimer's disease, Down syn- drome, and Dutch-type hereditary cerebrovascular amyloidosis, P3AP may play an important role in the

pathogenesis of other diseases, including ones out- side the central nervous system, for example, IBM. (Am J Pathol 1992, 141: [31][32][33][34][35][36] arms, male predominance, and often a poor or no re- sponse to immunosuppression treatment are present. Light-microscopic (LM) pathologic features include: de- grees of inflammation varying from abundant to none; muscle fibers with rimmed vacuoles, which usually con- tain red-staining material with the modified trichrome re- action7; and a few atrophic angular, panesterase-dark muscle fibers, suggestive of a denervation component. By routine histochemistry, IBM can be difficult to distin- guish from polymyositis. Electronmicroscopy (EM) re- veals that abnormal muscle fibers contain cytoplasmic tubulo-filaments (CTFs), 15-21 nm external and 3-6 nm internal diameter; these are the ultrastructural diagnostic criteria of IBM.15

Autosomal recessive "hereditary IBM" designates rare patients with progressive muscle weakness, CTFs in vacuoles of abnormal muscle fibers, and atrophic muscle fibers, but no inflammation in the biopsy.>10 The pathogenesis of these disorders and the origin of CTFs are unknown.

We demonstrated in both sporadic and hereditary IBM that vacuolated muscle fibers contain strong ubiquitin immunoreactivity, which by immunoelectronmicroscopy was localized to CTFs. 1 1,12 It has also been shown that the vacuolated muscle fibers contain Congo-red positivity indicating amyloid,13 but the type of amyloid protein was not identified. Because P-amyloid protein (PAP) is localized in ubiquitinated senile plaques in the Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain,1117 we investigated whether in IBM muscle biopsies PAP is a constituent of the amyloid deposits that coexist with ubiquitin in vacuo- lated muscle fibers.

Inclusion-body myositis (IBM) is diagnosed by a combi- nation of features.1" Clinically adult-onset, usually spo- radic, progressive muscle weakness, thinning of the fore- AJPJulv 1992, Vol. 141, No. I

Material and Methods

Patients pAP immunolocalization was performed in diagnostic muscle biopsy sections from 25 patients, ages 5-73 years, with the following diagnoses: sporadic IBM, 10; autosomal-recessive hereditary IBM in an Iranian Jew, 1; polymyositis, 7; Duchenne muscular dystrophy, 1; amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 4; normal muscle, 2. The me- dian age of IBM patients was 64 years and the median age of the non-IBM controls was 60 years. Diagnosis of all patients was based on clinical, laboratory, muscle- biopsy 18-reaction histochemistry,18 and ultrastructural studies. All IBM patients had CTFs by electronmicro- scopy and ubiquitinated inclusions by immunocytochemistry. All patients with sporadic IBM, except the patient with hereditary IBM, had crystal-violet positive (metachromatic red) amyloid inclusions19 in vacuolated muscle fibers. Crystal-violet positive amyloid inclusions were also positive with thioflavine S.

Immunocytochemistry

Light microscopic immunocytochemistry was done on 1 0-,um transverse sections of fresh-frozen muscle biop- sies, using peroxidase-antiperoxidase (PAP) and fluores- cence stainings, following the same general procedures as described. 1 20 Two well-characterized antibodies were used: 1) mouse monoclonal antibody G-OP-1, di- rected against sequence 8-17 of 3-amyloid synthetic peptide,21 diluted 1:200; and 2) rabbit polyclonal anti- body Rl 280, directed against sequence 1-40 of the syn- thetic peptide,22 diluted 1:2000. Ubiquitin (Ub) was local- ized with a monoclonal antibody, clone 042691 GS (Chemicon, Temecula, CA), diluted 1:20. In our previous study, this antibody proved to be specific and produced the same results as several other well-characterized monoclonal and polyclonal Ub antibodies.' 11'1223 Double immunolocalization of PAP and Ub was performed using fluorescence staining, as we have described.20 '23 Specificity of PAP immunoreactivity was determined by: a) omitting the primary antibody, b) replacing the pri- mary antibody with non-immune serum, and c) absorb- ing the primary monoclonal antibody with synthetic ,BAP peptide sequence 8-17.  For electronmicroscopic (EM) immunocytochemistry, ,BAP was localized on 1 0-,um unfixed frozen sections ad- hered to the bottom of 35-mm Petri dishes, according to our method for ultrastructural localization of Ub immunoreactivity."1 After 48 hours of incubation in the monoclo- nal antibody against PAP, sections were incubated 69- 72 hours in diluted goat anti-mouse-IgG serum conju- gated to 10-nm gold (Amersham, Arlington Heights, IL). Then the sections were fixed in paraformaldehydeglutaraldehyde, postfixed in osmium, and embedded in situ in the Petri dish according to our method for cultured muscle.24 After being embedded, the section in the dish was viewed under phase-contrast microscopy and com- pared with an adjacent cross-section that had been stained with crystal violet to visualize metachromatic-red amyloid inclusions. The same muscle fibers that contained amyloid-positive inclusions in vacuoles with the crystal violet stain were identified in the adjacent gold- labeled Epon-embedded section. From the latter, a small (1-mm diameter) area containing the identified fiber (or fibers) was marked with a modified 16-gauge needle at- tached to the microscope. 25 The Epon disk was removed from the dish, and the marked areas were cored-drilled out as described.24'25 The drilled-out cores, each con- taining at least one vacuolated muscle fiber, were mounted in an Epon blank block,25 trimmed, and thin- sectioned. The thin sections were counterstained with uranyl acetate lead citrate, and examined by EM.

Results

Light Microscopy

Vacuolated muscle fibers of sporadic and hereditary IBM biopsies contained dark ,BAP-IR inclusions within large and small vacuoles (Figure 1). In these positive patients, IAP-IR inclusions were present in almost 100% of their vacuolated fibers. The 3AP-IR inclusions had an amor- phous pattern and were located subsarcolemmally or more internally in the fibers. At a given cross-sectional level, in hereditary IBM the inclusions tended to be larger and single, whereas in sporadic IBM they were often small and multiple throughout the fiber (Figure 1). In some abnormal and highly vacuolated muscle fibers, IAP-IR accumulations appeared to be extending outside the boundary of the muscle fiber. In sporadic IBM, rarely were there nonvacuolated muscle fibers containing a thin subsarcolemmal rim of ,AP-IR (Figure 1A). In the hered- itary IBM biopsy, some muscle fibers contained a strong, wide subsarcolemmal PAP accumulation that extended to the interior of the fiber (Figure 1 G). Comparison of the immunolocalization of UB and PAP after double immuno- staining showed that Ub-IR was colocalized with IAP-IR in all P3AP-positive fibers (Figure 1 E-H).

When the primary antibody was omitted, absorbed, or replaced by a nonimmune serum, the immunoreaction did not take place.

One hundred percent of the crystal-violet positive muscle fibers had PAP-IR. However, 100% of the ,BAP- positive muscle fibers in hereditary IBM and 1.5% of the ,B-amyloid Protein in Inclusion-body Myositis 33 V$, immunostaining for PAP (E,G) and ubiq- uitin (F,H). PAP is localized with Texas red and ubiquitin with green FITC; (E,F) sporadic IBM X1250; (G,H) hereditary IBM X813. There is close colocalization between P3AP and ubiquitin in (E, F) and (G,H).

,BAP-positive muscle fibers in sporadic IBM were crystalviolet negative. None of the biopsies of seven patients with polymyositis and none of the other control patients' biopsies had the IAP-IR inclusions that were characteristic of IBM.

EM Immunocytochemistry

Most of the structures immunodecorated by the PAP an- tibody consisted of irregular clusters of nearly amorphous material; those structures were either irregular or rounded (Figure 2A-C,F,I). In such structures, ,BAP was localized either throughout the entire area or on the looser peripheral parts that aggregated into short thin fibrils 6-8 nm in diameter. PAP-IR was also present on poorly defined dense, floccular material (Figure 2D,E). Amorphous structures intensively immunodecorated by PAP anti- body were sometimes seen close to CTFs; however, PAP-IR was never seen on them (Figure 2F). Inside some of the muscle fibers, large clusters of loosely packed amyloid-like fibrils 6-8 nm in diameter had small patches of 3AP-IR (Figure 2G). Also immunodecorated by ,BAP antibody were some loose fibrillar structures (Figure 2H,J). All of these ,BAP-IR structures seemed to be lo- cated inside the muscle fibers. In addition, outside of ab- normal muscle fibers, small patches of PAP-IR material were present lying in the extracellular space and inter- mingled with collagen fibers. G,H ,J: 7There are small patches of immuno- decoration in a cluster of loose fibrillar ma- terial. Lonig, lar-ger diameter (approximately 15 nm)filaments in (A,E,H) and a cluster of those filamenits in (F) are niot immunodeco- rated. I: Portioni of a myofibril is at the upper left, (A) X43,000; (B) X81,000; (C) X33,000;

(D) x 67,000; (E) x 59,000; (F) X43,000; (G) x 42,000; (H) x33,000; (I) x 62,000; (J) x33,000.

Discussion

This study provides, to our knowledge, the first demonstration of ,BAP accumulation in diseased human skeletal muscle. It thereby indicates that ,BAP accumulations are not exclusively in AD, Down syndrome, Dutch-type hereditary cerebrovascular amyloidosis, and advanced age.

PAP was discovered in and first sequenced from the amyloid fibrils in blood vessels of AD patients.26 Subse- quently, it was also isolated from senile plaques of AD brain.2728 AP has received considerable attention regarding the pathogenesis of AD.161729 ,BAP is composed of a 4 kda polypeptide, which is produced by proteolytic cleavage of the much larger amyloid precursor protein. 1617,30   In AD brain, ,BAP deposits occur in: a) typical Congored positive senile plaques composed mainly of 8-nm diameter amyloid fibrils and dystrophic neurites, and b) so-called diffuse "pre-amyloid" plaques that are Congo- red negative and do not contain typical amyloid fibrils.31'32 (Congo-red positivity in the form of anisotropic dichroism and crystal-violet positivity in the form of a metachromatic red color are indicators of amyloid, and presumably are based on its 3-pleated sheet configuration; they do not indicate the specific type of protein composing the amyloid.) In AD brain, the Congo-red- negative but P3AP-positive plaques are considered to be an early pathologic change.29 Another characteristic of the AD brain, intraneuronal neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), which are composed of 1 0-nm paired helical filaments (PHF), lack I3AP-IR1c17'2933 (although extracellular r-amyloid Protein in Inclusion-body Myositis 35   AJPJuly 1992, Vol. 141, No. 1 "ghost" NTFs do contain PAP-IR.15'33 Ubiquitin-IR is present not only in both kinds of plaques, Congo-redpositive and negative, but also in the intraneuronal NFTs.14,15'32'34 Similar abnormalities to those in AD brain occur in brains of older patients with Down syndrome and to a slight extent in advanced aging. 16'1729 Because in both IBM muscle and AD brain the amy- loid accumulations are immunoreactive with ,BAP and Ub, they may result from similar cellular events. Electron mi- croscopically, the PAP-IR in IBM is present in structures similar to those described as PAP-positive in AD brain.15

Even though by light microscopy PAP-IR and Ub-IR are closely colocalized in IBM muscle fibers, the spatially intermixed abnormal subcellular organelles by electron microscopy show differences: 15-21-nm diameter CTFs are strongly positive for ubiquitin-IR but negative for PAP-IR, whereas the 6-8-nm amyloid-like filaments have prominent PAP-IR (their ubiquitin status has not yet been clarified). Some muscle fibers had PAP-positive accumulations but, because they were crystal-violet and thioflavin-S negative, apparently did not contain amyloid in p-pleated sheets. Those muscle fibers, widely prevalent in our one case of hereditary IBM, may represent early changes of IBM and therefore be analogous to the finding in AD brains where PAP accumulations in the "diffuse" Congo- red-negative plaques seem to represent early changes.29

The presence of PAP accumulations deeply internal in some muscle fibers suggests their intracellular origin. In other vacuolated muscle fibers, the origin of the PAP seems less certain because the fiber appears fragile and the surface membrane might have been transiently bro- ken, such that PAP could have moved in from outside the muscle fiber. By EM, some of the vacuolated fibers contained, seemingly within muscle fibers, a few pAP-IR fil- aments intermingled with collagen fibrils. Because collagen fibrils are an extracellular component, those PAP fil- aments may have been generated inside the muscle but become intermixed with exogenous collagen fibrils that had entered through a broken surface membrane, or both may have been generated outside of the fiber. Future studies will be required to determine the pre- cise origin and pathogenic steps of abnormal PAP accu- mulation in IBM muscle. Important questions are: a) is PAP in IBM-muscle produced intracellularly or is it trans- ported from the extracellular region, or both; b) is amyloid precursor protein increased in abnormal muscle fibers; c) is the immunoreactive PAP protein of IBM derived from, or does it have homology with, another normal cel- lular protein, and if so, which one; d) because CTFs (like the intraneuronal NFTs in AD brain14'15) contain Ub- immunoreactivity"1 but not pAP-immunoreactivity, does PAP have any relationship to CTF protein; and e) do PAP accumulations occur in any other muscle diseases that we have not yet studied?

Because the accumulations of PAP in IBM muscle and AD brain have many similar features, their pathogen- esis may be similar. Accordingly, detailed molecular studies of pathogenic mechanisms in the more readily accessible biopsied living IBM muscle (as compared with brain), including use of cultured IBM muscle biopsies,35 could be advantageous for understanding both diseases.

Acknowledgments

The authors thank Dr. George G. Glenner for the gift of the PAP monoclonal antibody and synthetic ,BAP, Dr. Dennis J. Selkoe for the gift of the ,BAP polyclonal antibody, Burt Handelsman for technical assistance in histochemistry, and Maggie Baburyan for technical assistance in photography.

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. Light microscopic immunocytocbemisty of IBM muscle biopsies. A,B: PAP reaction. C,D: Fluorescent staining, all of MAP immunoreactivity in vacuolated muscle fibers ofsporadic IBM, x 1250. E-H: Double

Figure 2 .2Figure 2. Electroni microscopic immunoclto- chem istry of AP using gold particles. A,B,C,F,1: Immulnl usodecorationi by anti-AP of various of amorphouis or nzearly amor- phous structures. A-C: Gold particles are present oni less-tightly packed peripheral ma- terial which appears fibrillar. D, E: Abundant gold particles are oni floccular material.

