

collagen were detected in one of thirteen patients with sudden deafness and two of ninety-one healthy individuals.

The low positivity of type I I collagen antibodies in patients with inner ear disease is not consistent with an autoimmune response against a1(II) chains of type II collagen, which have a molecular mass of about 95 kDa. Additionally, the 68 kDa antigen of the inner ear might be more important in autoimmune sensorineural hearing loss.7 The discrepancies between our results and those of Helfgott et al might represent differences in patient populations, and they point to a need for the collaborative exchange of serum samples between laboratories investigating the cause of sensorineural hearing loss.

group B disease causes less inflammation and less hearing loss than that due to the other groups. This finding may arise because the immune system reacts less to the group B capsular polysaccharide, which is immunochemically identical to a fetal brain glycopeptide.1 This is also shown by the low immunogenicity of this polysaccharide, which hinders the development of an effective vaccine against N meningitidis serogroup B. Other sequelae were evenly distributed among the serogroups. Why are unusual meningococcal serogroups associated with hearing loss more frequently (24% in our study) than common serogroups? There may be immunological reasons, since many patients with disease due to the uncommon groups have a complement deficiency.s 2. Netherlands Reference Laboratory for Bacterial Meningitis (RIVM/UvA). Bacterial meningitis in the Netherlands; annual report 1990. Amsterdam: University of Amsterdam, 1991.

3. Spanjaard L. Epidemiology of bacterial meningitis in the Netherlands; volume 1. Chapter 8. Thesis. Amsterdam: University of Amsterdam, 1986. 4. Finne J, Leinonen M, M&auml;kel&auml; PH. Antigenic similarities between brain components and bactena causing meningitis; implications for vaccine development and pathogenesis. Lancet 1983; ii: 355-57. 5 Fijen CAP, Kuijper ED, Hannema AD, Sjoholm AG, Van Putten JPM. Complement deficiencies m patients over ten years old with meningococcal disease due to uncommon serogroups. Lancet 1989, n: 585-88.

&bgr;-amyloid protein immunoreactivity in muscle of patients with inclusion-body myositis SIR,&mdash;Inclusion-body myositis (1HM) is a usually sporadic progressive myopathy of unknown cause and pathogenesis.' It has clinical and pathological similarities to polymyositis, but is either not responsive, or only moderately so, to immunosuppressive treatment. Light-microscopic features of muscle-biopsy specimens include mononuclear inflammatory cells varying from abundant to none, atrophic muscle fibres, and muscle fibres with rimmed vacuoles that contain characteristic cytoplasmic tubulofilaments (CTFs) identified by electronmicroscopy.2 We have shown that vacuolated muscle fibres contain strong ubiquitin immuno- reactivity, which by immunoelectronmicroscopy was localised to CTFs.3 Vacuoles also show Congo-red positivity, indicating amyloid,4 but the type of amyloid protein has not been identified.

We report an investigation of 10 patients (aged 42-74, median 64) with inclusion-body myositis, including 1 hereditary case, and 14 control patients (aged 5-79, median 60), including 7 with polymyositis, 1 Duchenne muscular dystrophy, 4 amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and 2 normal muscle. Vacuolated muscle fibres contained strong accumulation of &bgr;-amyloid protein (&bgr;-AP) within the vacuoles and sometimes in vacuole-free cytoplasm (figure). &bgr;-AP was identified by immunocytochemical staining with a well-characterised monoclonal antibody G-OP-1 directed against sequence 8-17 of a synthetic &bgr;-AP.5 Omission of the primary antibody or replacing it with non-immune serum resulted in negative staining. With light microscopy, &bgr;-AP immunoreactivity closely co-localised with ubiquitin immunoreactivity. The amyloid inclusions were crystal-violet positive (metachromatic red) in all patients with sporadic disease, but not in the patient with hereditary disease. None of the muscle biopsy specimens from controls had &bgr;-AP-positive inclusions characteristic of inclusion-body myositis.

&bgr;-AP was discovered in and first sequenced from the amyloid fibrils in blood-vessels of patients with Alzheimer's disease and it has received considerable attention in the pathogenesis of this disease.' In brain of patients with Alzheimer's disease, &bgr;-AP immunoreactivity is present both in the amyloid fibrils (presumably &bgr;-pleated sheets), and located in blood-vessels and cores of senile plaques, as well as in non-fibrillar Congo-red-negative diffuse plaques, whereas ubiquitin immunoreactivity is seen at both locations.

Immunofluorescent staining of muscle-biopsy specimen from patient with inclusion-body myositis.

Transverse sections, showing positive &bgr;-amyloid protein deposits (white regions) in two abnormal muscle fibres Muscle fibre on left is more atrophic and vacuolated than that on right. Left x 1281, right x 1094, reduced by a factor of 1 4.

Previously, &bgr;-AP had not been localised in human muscle. The deposits of &bgr;-AP we describe in muscle-biopsy specimens from patients with inclusion-body myositis and the co-localisation with ubiquitin raise the possibility that &bgr;-AP deposits in muscle in inclusion-body myositis, and the brain findings in Alzheimer's disease may follow similar cellular events. The easily accessible muscle tissue may provide a good source for future molecular studies of &bgr;-AP to help to elucidate the pathogenesis of these two diseases. 

Supported in part by the Muscular Dystrophy

GEORGE G. GLENNER

Reduced plasma L-arginine in hypercholesterolaemia SIR,-L-arginine is the precursor for nitric oxide (NO) synthase in vascular endothelial cells,l and NO is an important regulator of vascular tone in man.2 Hypercholesterolaemia impairs endothelial function-manifested as an attenuation of endothelial-dependent relaxation-before the formation of artherosclerotic lesions.3-5

Experimentalb and clinicaF data have shown that impaired endothelial function in hypercholesterolaemia subjects could be corrected by L-arginine. This dysfunction might be due to substrate (L-arginine) deficiency, impairment of NO production or release, or inactivation of L-arginine.

To test the first hypothesis, we have examined in a prospective age-matched study plasma L-arginine concentrations in 13 patients with normal serum cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) (group 1), and in 13 patients with hypercholesterolaemia type IIa (group II). In group I, cholesterol was less than 220 mg/dl (mean 182, SD 22) and LDL was less than 140 mg/dl (123,14), and patients were aged 30-76 years (mean 56, SD 13). In group II, cholesterol was over 270 mg/dl (mean 301, SD 27), and LDL was over 180 mg/dl (220,25), and patients were aged 43-76 years (56,10). Exclusion criteria were severe, systemic, or infectious diseases and disorders of the kidney and liver. None of the patients with hypercholesterolaemia had received lipid-lowering therapy in the 6 months before this study. The diagnoses of group I and II, respectively, were coronary artery disease (9/9), dilated cardiomyopathy (1/0), valvular heart disease (1/2), essential hypertension (2/2), peripheral vascular disease (1/2), and diabetes mellitus (2/3). Drug treatment was similar in the two groups. Blood samples were taken under standardised conditions-at 0800 h after 15 min rest, in the supine position, and 12 h after the last meal. L-arginine plasma concentrations were measured by high-performance liquid chromatography. Double control measurements showed an accuracy of 4-2% (SD 3). In patients with hypercholesterolaemia, L-arginine plasma values were significantly lower than in age-matched patients with normal cholesterol: (mean [SD]) 78-2 (21) vs 111-2 (22-8) &micro;mol/1; p < 0-001).

As far as we are aware there are no other reports of reduced plasma L-arginine in patients with hypercholesterolaemia. These data suggest that impairment of endothelium-dependent relaxation in patients with hypercholesterolaemia may be, in part, due to a deficiency of L-arginine, the precursor of NO. The underlying mechanisms for reduced L-arginine remain to be elucidated. However, hypercholesterolaemia might be associated with diminished dietary L-arginine uptake (ie, food rich in lipids may contain less L-arginine) or altered L-arginine metabolism, such as increased arginase activity in the liver. If our findings are confirmed by investigations in a large patient population, L-arginine supplements may indeed represent a useful adjunctive and preventive treatment in patients with hypercholesterolaemia. The J-curve hypothesis SIR,-Dr Cruickshank (Jan 18, p 187) reminds us that, despite the stake driven through its heart by your Nov 23 editorial (p 1299), the J-curve hypothesis continues to stalk during dark moonless nights. But in what guise?

Initially, we were warned that reduction in blood pressure might be hazardous but only in hypertensive patients with pre-existing coronary heart disease; normotensive patients would be spared. Most recently, we find that even subjects who had mostly never been hypertensive let alone treated are at risk.2 Few would disagree that there must be a J-relation between diastolic blood pressure and coronary heart disease events. The critical question is, what is the level of the J-point? Here too, the goalposts are shifting; first 85-90 mm Hg,l now 75-79 mm Hg.2 Is it time to lower the limit further?

In studies of left ventricular dysfunction (SOLVD), patients with symptomatic left ventricular (LV) dysfunction (heart failure) and symptomless LV dysfunction were randomised to treatment with the angiotensin-converting-enzyme (ACE) inhibitor enalapril or matching placebo. Most patients enrolled had LV dysfunction due to coronary artery disease (usually previous myocardial infarction) and those with heart failure had fairly low arterial pressures (mean diastolic pressure 77 mm Hg). Despite receiving

Spanjaard L, Bol P, De Marie S, Zanen HC. Association of meningococcal serogroups with the course of disease in the Netherlands, 1959-83. Bull World Health OrganNetherlands Reference Laboratoryfor Bacterial Meningitis of theL. SPANJAARDNational Institute of Public Health and Environmental Protection, University of Amsterdam,P. BOL S. DE MARIE1105 AZ Amsterdam, NetherlandsH. C. ZANEN1. 1987; 65: 861-68.

Association and the Vemon B. Link Research Fund.USC Neuromuscular Center, University of Southern California School of Medicine,VALERIE ASKANAS W. KING ENGELLos Angeles, California 90017, USARENATE B. ALVAREZUniversity of California San DiegoSchool of Medicine,La Jolla

