Strong immunoreactivity offl-amyloid precursor protein, including the fl-amyloid protein sequence, at human neuromuscular junctions

At the postsynaptic domain of the human neuromuscular junction (NMJ), we have demonstrated strong concentrations of the N-terminus 45 -62, C-terminus 676-695 and fl-amyloid protein sequences offl-amyloid precursor protein (flAPP). We used well-character~ed monoc!onal and p0!yclonal antibodies for co-localization with three other postsynaptic proteins, applying double and triple fluorescence labeling. Strong immunoreactivity of all threeflAPP sequences was found at all NMJs identified by bound ~-bungarotoxin (0tBY), where they co-localized with ~zBT and with immunoreactive desmin and dystrophin, which are postsynaptic proteins of human NMJs. This appears to be the first demonstration offlAPP sequences concentrated postsynaptically at human NMJs. flAPP may have a role in normal junctional biology and possibly in some diseases affecting NMJs.

fl-Amyloid precursor protein (flAPP), a product of a chromosome-21 gene [28], exists in virtually all tissues [6,8,9,26,32,34]. flAPP is a glycoprotein cell surface component containing a large extracellular N-terminus domain, a transmembrane domain and a short cytoplasmic carboxyl-terminus domain [9, 15,21]. The flAPP gene produces at least three alternatively spliced transcripts encoding flAPP containing 695, 751 or 770 amino acids: last two contain in their extracellular region an insert of a Kunitz-type protease inhibitor [9, 15,19,2 In 31]. The biological functions of flAPP are unknown, but it may play a role in mediating: cell-to-cell and cell-to-matrix interaction [7, 16,22,28], neurite growth [7], and maintenance of cell integrity and shape [20]. Its presynaptic localization at central and peripheral synapses has been reported [23].

fl-Amyloid protein (flAP) is a 39-42 residue polypeptide that is a part offlAPP [9, 15,21]. flAP is the major component of amyloid fibrils in blood vessels and senile plaques in the brain of patients with Alzheimer's Disease, Down syndrome, Dutch hereditary cerebrovascular amyloidosis, and very advanced age [13,18,25] [reviewed in ref 24]. We have recently demonstrated pathologic accumulation of flAP [3,4] and two other flAPP sequences [5], along with ubiquitin [2], in vacuolated muscle fibers of inclusion body myositis. We now dem- onstrate that the N-terminus 45-62, C-terminus 676-695, and flAP sequences of flAPP are highly concentrated at the postsynaptic domain of normal human neuromuscular junctions (NMJs).

Immunolocalization was performed on 10/lm transverse sections of fresh-frozen diagnostic human muscle biopsies. The biopsies were screened with our 18 routine histochemical reactions [10]. Fifteen that showed no abnormality and contained pan-esterase-positive NMJs were selected for study. More than 200 NMJs were analyzed. Four antibodies against flAPP sequences were used: (a) rabbit polyclonal antiserum C8, directed against a synthetic peptide of C-terminal amino-acids 676-695 (C-flAPP) [26], diluted 1:1000; (b) rabbit polyclonal antiserum, anti-SP18, against the N-terminal sequence 45-62 (N-flAPP) [29], diluted 1:500: (c) rabbit polyclonal antiserum R1280, against sequence 1-40 of synthetic flAP [14], diluted 1:1000; and (d) mouse monoclonal antibody G-OP-1, against sequence 8 17 of synthetic flAP, diluted 1:200 [33]. In all experiments, NMJs were identified by the binding of FITC-or rhodaminelabeled ~-bungarotoxin (~BT) (Molecular Probes) to the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (AChRs).

To co-localize flAPP with other postsynaptic proteins situated at human NMJs [1, 11,27], monoclonal antibodies against desmin (Chemicon), ubiquitin (Chemicon), and the C-terminus portion of dystrophin (Novocastra), were used in double or triple fluorescence-labeling utilizing FITC. Texas red, Rhodamine, and AMCA [1, 27]. Specificity of the flAPP immunoreactivites were determined by: (a) omitting the primary antibody, (b) replacing the primary antibody with non-immune serum, and (c) absorbing the anti-flAP primary monoclonal antibody with synthetic flAP sequence 8-17.

In all biopsies, all the NMJs identified by ~BT binding had very strong immunoreactivity of all the flAPP sequences. The muscle non-junctional sarcolemma was very faintly immunoreactive with all antibodies. The immunoreactive topographic pattern of the N-terminus sequence compared exactly to the localization of bound ccBT (Fig. 1). The flAP and C-flAPP sequences typically extended slightly deeper into the muscle fiber than the ~BT location (Figs. 1 and 2). The C-flAPP and flAP immunoreactivities closely co-localized with the postsynaptic cytoplasmic desmin immunoreactivity of the same triple-labeled NMJs (Fig. 3A,B,C and G,H,I). C-flAPP and flAP also co-localized with the concentration of dystrophin immunoreactivity at triple-labeled NMJs (Fig. 3D,E,F and J,K,L), as did N-flAPP (not illustrated). For all these immunolocalizations, when the primary anti-body was omitted, absorbed, or replaced by a non-immune serum, the immunoreaction did not take place.

The co-localization of flAP and C-flAPP with ~BT, desmin and dystrophin suggests that they are located at the postsynaptic membrane folds and the subsynaptic domain inside the muscle fiber. The close co-localization of N-flAPP with bound ~BT and dystrophin suggests that it may be mainly confined to the postsynaptic folds. Precise localization of the flAPP sequences awaits ultrastructural immunocytochemistry (in progress).

At the NMJ, the molecular composition of the muscle fiber's extracellular matrix, plasmalemma, and subsynaptic cytoplasmic domain are different from those of its non-synaptic region [reviewed in ref . 12]. By demonstrating that sequences offlAPP are strongly concentrated at the NMJs, our study raises the question of its normal function there*, For example, flAPP may be involved in: (a) maintaining stability and configuration of the postsynaptic membrane by associating with postsynaptic cytoskeletal components of the muscle fiber, e.g. dystrophin and desmin; (b) maintaining adhesion between the postsynaptic and presynaptic components: (c) the interaction between the postsynaptic plasmalemma and basal lamina (and perhaps junctional acetylcholinesterase): (d) inhibiting excessive or unwanted serine proteases that may exist at the NMJ: or (e) binding and internalization of synaptic substances (analogous to the demonstrated internalization of flAPP/flAP into lysosomes [17]. The strong concentration of flAPP at human NMJs also raises the possibility that it could have a pathogenic role in some diseases affecting those junctions.

For their generous gifts of antibodies, we are grateful to Drs. D.J. Selkoe, G.G. Glenner, B. Frangione, and D. Levartovsky. Supported in part by a grant from the California Chapter of the Myasthenia Gravis Foundation and the Pete Cagliero Research Fund.

*In this discussion we are assuming that the immunolocalized ]~AB, C-flAPR and N-,SAPP are residing within intact/~APR but conceivably a portion of them could also be separate from that parent molecule.

1 Askanas, V., Bornemann, A. and Engel, W.K., Immunocytochemical localization of desmin at human neuromuscular junctions, Neurology. 40 (1990) 

Fig. 1 .1Fig. 1. Double labeling of the human NMJs demonstrates close colocalization of ~BT bound to nicotinic acetylcholine receptors with the immunolocalization of 3 sequences of,6'APP, all x 1375, A,C,E: ccBT: B: N-flAPP: D: flAP: F: C-flAPP. TheflAP and C-flAPP immunoreactivities occupy a slightly larger area than those of c~BT and N-flAPR Lipot\~scin granules are autofluorescent in A,B.

Catterucia, N., WiUingale-Theune, J., Bunke, D., Prior, R., Masters, C.L., Crisanti, A. and Beyreuther, K., Ultrastructural localization of the putative precursors of" the A4 amyloid protein associated with Alzheimer's disease, Am. J. Pathol.,137 (1990)  19-26. 9 Dyrks, T., Wiedemann, A., Multhaup, G., Salbaum, J.M., Lemaire, H.G., Kang, J., Miiller-Hill, B., Masters, C.L. and Beyreuther, K,, Identification, transmembrane orientation and biogenesis of the amyloid A4 precursor of Alzheimer's disease, EMBO J.. 7 (19881 949 957. 10 Engel, W.K., Muscle biopsies in neuromuscular diseases, Pediatr.OFig. 2. Double labeling of the NMJs on the same section demonstrates close co-localization of flAP (Texas rcd) (A) and FlTC-labeled ~BT (B).Double photographic exposure (C) demonstrates that flAP immunoreactivity occupies a slightly' larger area th~n bound c~BT. extending slightlydeeper into the muscle fiber. × 57tt.949 953.5 Askanas, V., Engel, W.K. and Alvarez, R.B., lmmunoreactive/3-2 Askanas, V., Serdaroglu, P., Engel, W.K. and Alvarez, R.B., Im-amyloid precursor protein (APP),//-amyloid protein (flAP) andmunolocalization of ubiquitin in muscle biopsies of patients withubiquitin (Ub) in vacuolated muscle fibers of sporadic and heredi-inclusion body myositis and oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy,tary inclusion body myositis, Ann. Neurol., in press.Neurosci. Lett,, 130 (1991)73 76.6 Berkenbosch, F., Refolo, L.M., Friedrich, V.L., Casper, D., Blum,3 Askanas, V., F~ngel, W.K., Alvarez, R.B. and Glenner, G.G., fl-Amyloid protein immunoreactivity in muscle of patients with inclu-sion-body myositis, Lancet, 339 (1992) 560 561.4 Askanas, V., Engel, W.K. and Alvarez, R.B., Light-and electron-microscopic localization of,O'-amyloid protein in muscle biopsies ofpatients with inclusion-body myositis, Am. J. Pathol., 141 (1992)31 36.M. and Robakis, N.K., The Alzheimer's amyloid precursor protein is produced by type I astrocytes in primary cultures of rat neuroglia, J. Neurosci. Res.,25 (1990)431 440. 7 Breen, K.C., Bruce, M. and Anderton, B.H., fl-Amyloid precursor protein mediates neuronal cell-cell and cell-surface adhesion. J. Neurosci. Res., 28 (1991) 90-100. 8 Clin. North Am., 14 (1967) 963 996.

