Proposed pathogenetic cascade of inclusion-body myositis: importance of amyloid-␤, misfolded proteins, predisposing genes, and aging

Purpose of review

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis, the most common muscle disease of older persons, is of unknown cause, and there is no successful treatment. Interest in sporadic inclusion-body myositis has been enhanced by the recent identification within the sporadic inclusion-body myositis muscle fibers of several abnormally accumulated proteins, which provides novel and important clues to the pathogenesis of sporadic inclusion-body myositis.

Recent findings

This article summarizes the most recent findings leading to better understanding of the players in the pathogenetic cascade. It is suggested that lymphocytic inflammatory component is probably secondary, and it may contribute only slightly to muscle fiber damage in sporadic inclusion-body myositis. However, it is proposed that the identified abnormal accumulation, aggregation, and misfolding of proteins, combined with and perhaps provoked by an aging intracellular milieu, more essentially lead to the vacuolar degeneration and atrophy of the muscle fibers that are specific to sporadic inclusion-body myositis. Abnormal accumulations of the amyloid-␤ precursor protein and of its proteolytic fragment, amyloid-␤, associated with the aging cellular muscle fiber environment, appear to be key pathogenic events.

Summary

In conceptualizing a treatment for sporadic inclusion-body myositis, the accumulations of amyloid-␤42 and other unfolded proteins are now phenomena to be reckoned with. One would like to stop intracellular increase of the unfolded/misfolded proteins by reducing their formation and/or increasing their disposal. In addition, the identification of factors that would decrease intra-muscle fiber expressions of ␤-and ␥-secretases might lead to decreased production of putatively myotoxic oligomeric amyloid-␤42. Better understanding of the mechanisms and consequences of genes that predispose to sporadic inclusion-body myositis, and of human muscle fiber aging, could also provide new avenues toward the therapy of sporadic inclusion-body myositis. How to therapeutically capitalize on the new findings is now the challenge.

Introduction

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM), the most common muscle disease of persons aged 50 years and older, is of unknown cause and unconfirmed pathogenesis [1•-3•]. Its course is progressive, leading to severe disability. No consistently successful treatment is available. The clinical features of s-IBM and various treatment approaches were recently summarized [1•-4]. This review focuses on the most recent research advances leading to our newest consideration to the s-IBM pathogenic cascade. We raise the novel possibility that, among other factors, the abnormal accumulation, aggregation, and misfolding of proteins, combined with and perhaps provoked by an aged intracellular milieu, leads to the s-IBM-specific vacuolar degeneration and muscle fiber atrophy. We emphasize that abnormal accumulations of the amyloid-␤ precursor protein and of its proteolytic fragment, amyloid-␤ (A␤), associated with the aging cellular muscle fiber environment, are key pathogenic events (Fig. 1).

The term "hereditary inclusion-body myopathies" (h-IBM) was introduced in 1993 to designate hereditary muscle diseases with pathologic features strikingly resembling those of s-IBM except for lack of lymphocytic inflammation. Hence the term "myopathy" instead of "myositis" [5].

The h-IBMs are composed of several autosomal-recessive and autosomal-dominant syndromes of progressive muscle weakness with various clinical presentations. Even though several pathogenetic concepts apply both to s-IBM and the h-IBMs (Fig. 1), the h-IBMs are not the subject of this review. They were recently reviewed [6••].

General considerations

The diagnostic criteria of muscle biopsies of patients with s-IBM have recently been reviewed [1•,2,7]. The main light microscopic features of the s-IBM muscle biopsy include (1) vacuolated muscle fibers, (2) intramuscle fiber amyloid inclusions, and (3) various degrees of lymphocytic cellular inflammation. Because of the presence of inflammation, s-IBM has been considered an inflammatory myopathy, together with polymyositis and dermatomyositis, and several recent reviews addressed the inflammatory aspects of these disorders [8,9,10•]. Whereas in muscle biopsy specimens from s-IBM the inflammatory component is present, at least in the early involvement of a given muscle, patients with s-IBM as a group respond poorly to antidysimmune treatment, in contrast to patients with polymyositis and dermatomyo-sitis [1•-4,7-10•]. Patients over age 50 with what could be considered "pure PM" are rare [1•]. Virtually all older patients with lymphocytic myositis have s-IBM. In s-IBM, lymphocytic inflammation may be a secondary component, occurring in response to "foreign" antigenic proteins (such as viral proteins or altered normal muscle proteins) abnormally produced within (see below) and "foreignizing" s-IBM muscle fibers, which can be antigen-presenting cells. Muscle fibers are known to induce antigen-specific immune responses and have recently been demonstrated to express B7.1/2-related costimulatory molecule ICOSL [11•]. A possibility that excessive accumulation of A␤PP/A␤ induces inflammation has been proposed by us and by others [1•-3•,7,10•]. This possibility can be further supported by the finding of inflammation, in addition to other abnormalities, in transgenic mice muscle fibers overexpressing A␤ precursor protein (A␤PP) [12,13]. Alternatively, non-muscle foreign protein, such as from a virus, may be produced in macrophages and be presented by them. Moreover, lymphocytic inflammation can occur in several human genetic muscle diseases that are generally considered noninflammatory, including dysferlin deficiency, laminin-2 deficiency, and facioscapular muscular dystrophy [14-

Figure 1. Proposed pathogenetic cascade of sporadic inclusion-body myositis and the hereditary inclusion-body myopathies

In this model, sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM) is considered to be a multifactorial muscle disease associated with aging. It is proposed that various factors, including predisposing genes and possibly infectious agents and environmental factors, in association with aging, lead to key cellular mechanisms, presently unknown, that cause increased A␤PP transcription, resulting in A␤PP overexpression. That overexpression, with participation of factors causing abnormal A␤PP processing, leads to A␤42 > A␤40 accumulation and oligomerization. Subsequently, the increased A␤, both partially aggregated (oligomerized) and fully aggregated (fibrillar, congophilic), leads to oxidative stress and several other abnormalities, resulting in muscle fiber degeneration, atrophy, and death. Those cellular abnormalities may be induced by A␤ acting either independently or in conjunction with oxidative stress and its effects.

16]. We have proposed that s-IBM is a multifactorial disease in which the milieu of the aged muscle fibers promotes development of the characteristic vacuolar degeneration and ectopic expression of several potentially toxic proteins, which lead to disease progression, independently of, and perhaps preceding, an inflammatory component [1•]. Here we focus on the possible factors leading to the IBM-specific degenerative component of s-IBM muscle biopsy specimens.

Phenotypic similarities to Alzheimer disease brain

An intriguing feature of the s-IBM muscle fiber molecular phenotype is its similarity to the brain in Alzheimer disease (AD), including accumulations of amyloid-␤ precursor protein (A␤PP), amyloid-␤ (A␤), phosphorylated tau in the form of paired-helical filaments, presenilin-1, and several other "Alzheimer-characteristic" proteins [1•,2,7]. Yet, each disease category, inclusion-body myositis (IBM) and AD, remains organ specific, involving postmitotic muscle fibers or postmitotic neurons. The tissue affected in the sporadic forms, muscle versus brain, may be influenced by ( 1) an etiologic agent (possibly a virus), ( 2) previous exposure to environmental factor(s), and/or (3) the patient's genetic background (the cellular microclimate), including different predisposing genes (see below).

Putative key pathogenic role of intracellular accumulation of A␤PP/A␤

We have proposed a key upstream or midstream role of increased intracellular A␤PP/A␤ in the pathogenesis of s-IBM, suggesting that it causes abnormal signal transduction, modulation of other genes, induction of oxidative stress, mitochondrial malfunction, and other abnormalities [1•,2,7]. Our hypothesis is supported by the fact that accumulation of A␤PP/A␤ in s-IBM muscle fibers precedes other abnormalities and by our tissue culture studies showing that experimental overexpression of A␤PP through direct A␤PP gene transfer (via adenovirus vector) into normal, mature, cultured human muscle fibers induced several aspects of the IBM pathologic phenotype [17][18][19].

Additional support for our hypothesis of an intracellular toxicity of A␤PP and A␤ in the pathogenesis of IBM was provided by transgenic mouse models overexpressing A␤PP within muscle fibers, in which some aspects of the pathologic changes of IBM were produced, but only after the mice were aged [12,13]. In AD, the pathogenic importance of an intracellular (intraneuronal) accumulation of A␤ was proposed by us previously [20], and it is beginning to gain favor in the AD field [20][21][22][23].

Evidence of abnormalities of the A␤PP processing machinery

There is an increased evidence that some of the factors participating in the A␤PP processing are increased in S-IBM muscle fibers.

BACE1 and BACE2

BACE1 and BACE2, glycosylated transmembrane proteins, are recently discovered ␤-secretases that cleave A␤PP at the N terminal of A␤ [24][25][26][27]. Expression of BACE1 and BACE2 is increased in s-IBM muscle fibers, where they accumulate in the form of inclusions colocalizing with A␤ [28,29••]. In addition, both BACEs coimmunoprecipitate with A␤PP in s-IBM muscle (Vattemi and Askanas, unpublished observation, 2003), providing novel evidence that they may participate in A␤PP processing and abnormal generation of A␤ there.

Nicastrin and presenilins

␥-Secretase cleaves A␤PP at the C terminal of A␤, generating either A␤40 or A␤42 [30••]. The nature of ␥-secretase is not known. However, nicastrin, in a complex with presenilin-1 and presenilin-2, is absolutely necessary for ␥-secretase action [31•-33]. Nicastrin, Presenilin-1 and presenilin-2 are strongly overexpressed in s-IBM muscle fibers, where they colocalize with each other and with A␤ [34,35]. They are physically associated with A␤PP in s-IBM and A␤PP-overexpressing muscle fibers [Vattemi and Askanas, 2003,unpublished observations]. This strongly suggests that those factors participate in A␤ production within IBM muscle fibers. Our studies provided the first demonstration of nicastrin in human muscle, and they showed that together with BACE1, BACE2, and presenilins, IBM muscle fibers contain the machinery for A␤PP processing, leadingtogether with other factors (see below)-to abnormal A␤ production.

Cholesterol and caveolin-1

Free cholesterol is abnormally accumulated in IBM muscle fibers [36••]. It colocalizes with abnormally accumulated A␤, phosphorylated tau, and caveolin-1 [36••,37]. In addition to being abnormally accumulated within s-IBM muscle fibers, caveolin-1, a major protein of plasmalemmal microdomain caveolae and an intracellular transporter of cholesterol [38], is physically associated with A␤PP in s-IBM muscle fibers, suggesting that it has a direct role in A␤PP processing (Vattemi and Askanas, unpublished observations, 2003). In nonmuscle cells, experimental loading with cholesterol increases A␤ production and amyloidogenesis [36••], and in A␤PP-overexpressing cultured human muscle fibers, exposure to cholesterol induces A␤ deposition and overexpression of caveolin-1 [39]. We therefore propose that within s-IBM muscle fibers, cholesterol, instead of being properly metabolized or cleared, is deposited, with caveolin-1, at sites of A␤ accumulation and possibly at sites of A␤PP processing, where it may adversely increase A␤ production and induce A␤ misfolding and aggregation.

Cystatin C

Cystatin C, an endogenous cysteine protease inhibitor, was previously proposed to participate in A␤ deposition within the amyloid plaques of the brain in AD [40,41].

Pathogenetic cascade of inclusion-body myositis Askanas and Engel 739

Within muscle fiber biopsy specimens from s-IBM, cystatin C is strongly immunoreactive in the form of inclusions, which ultrastructurally colocalize with the A␤ immunoreactivity; its total expression is strongly increased; and it coimmunoprecipitates with A␤PP [42••]. Our studies demonstrate for the first time, as far as we are aware, that cystatin C physically associates with A␤PP, suggesting that it possibly influences ABPP processing as well as A␤ deposition.

A␤42 is preferentially accumulated in muscle fiber biopsy specimens from sporadic inclusion-body myositis

A␤ is a 40-42 amino acid peptide, whose toxicity is considerably enhanced by its self-association into toxic oligomers and into polymeric ␤-pleated sheet amyloid [43,44••]. The more hydrophobic A␤42 is more prone to self-association and oligomerization, and it is much more cytotoxic than A␤40 [45,46]. In s-IBM muscle fibers, deposits containing A␤42 are much more common than those containing A␤40 [47]. All congophilic (fibrillar, amyloidic) A␤ inclusions contain A␤42, and some contain both A␤42 and A␤40 [47]. By gold-immuno-electron microscopy, A␤42 is on 6-to 10-nm amyloid fibrils and amorphous material, whereas A␤40 is only on small patches of amorphous material but not on amyloid fibrils. If oligomerization of A␤42 is responsible for its toxicity and precedes its deposition into amyloid deposits, drugs preventing that oligomerization may offer a new treatment.

Evidence that unfolded/misfolded proteins may participate in pathogenesis of sporadic inclusion-body myositis

Several factors, or combination of factors, need to be considered. The two major types of intracellular inclusions in s-IBM muscle contain either A␤ or phosphorylated tau. By light microscopy, those containing A␤ are rounded and plaquelike, whereas those containing phosphorylated tau are more squiggly [7]. Both types of inclusions are rich in ubiquitin, and they contain several other accumulated proteins, some of which are present in each type of the inclusion (Table1) [1•,2,7]. Both forms of inclusions are "amyloid"-positive, indicating that they contain proteins in the fibrillar-␤-pleated sheet configuration [7]. Some of the other proteins accumulated within the inclusions, such as ␣-synuclein, cellular prion protein, presenilin1, and SOD1, have, similarly to A␤ and tau, a propensity to unfold, misfold, and form ␤-pleated sheet amyloid [7,34,[52][53][54][55]66]. Accordingly, we postulate that the formation of the IBM-characteristic ubiquitinated multiprotein inclusions in s-IBM muscle is due to protein unfolding and misfolding . In general, protein aggregation leading to the formation of inclusions is considered to be caused by binding of partly unfolded or misfolded polypeptides induced by interaction among their inappropriately exposed hydrophobic surfaces [48 there is increased transcription of several genes, ie, A␤PP-751, cellular prion protein, enzymes involved in cellular defense against oxidative stress, and c-Jun [1•,2,7]. Those factors may contribute to increased transcription, abnormal accumulation, and crowding of proteins, leading to their unfolding and possibly to abnormal glycosylation and other deleterious consequences to the proteins and the muscle cell.

Possible mechanisms underlying formation of inclusion bodies in muscle of inclusion-body myositis

Diseases characterized by protein misfolding and aggregation are presently considered conformational diseases [48••]. Aggregations of proteins into insoluble intracellular protein complexes and inclusion bodies have been

Endoplasmic reticulum stress and unfolded protein response

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is an intracellular compartment having a critical role in the processing, folding and exporting of newly-synthesized proteins in the secretory pathway [58,59]. Various factors, including the presence of misfolded proteins, oxidative stress, and abnormally glycosylated proteins, can interfere with ER function, leading to ER stress [60][61][62] The unfolded protein response is a mechanism by which cells attempt to protect themselves against ER stress [60,61]. It involves upregulation of several classes of ER chaperone proteins, whose main functions are to facilitate folding of the unfolded proteins and to prevent protein aggregation. In s-IBM muscle fibers, there are abnormal focal accumulations of five ER chaperones, BiP/GRP78, GRP94, Erp72, calreticulin and calnexin, each of which colocalizes with A␤ [63]. Moreover, each of these five ER chaperones physically associates with A␤PP in s-IBM muscle (Vattemi and Askanas, unpublished observations, 2003), suggesting that they have a role in attempting to fold A␤PP and/or A␤. Accordingly, the ER stress and unfolded protein response in s-IBM muscle strongly suggest that unfolded/misfolded proteins participate in the pathogenic cascade.

Transcription errors; accumulation of mutated ubiquitin

Ubiquitin (UBB +1 ) is produced by an acquired transcriptional error, a "molecular misreading," typically in an aging environment. The aberrant transcripts are formed as a result of dinucleotide loss during or after transcription and can be translated from the deletion onward into the +1 reading frame [64,65]. UBB +1 was recently shown to be accumulated in AD brain [64,65]. Aging and oxidative stress are possible facilitators of UBB +1 accumulation in AD brain. UBB +1 is toxic to cells because its ubiquitinated form inhibits proteasome [66••]. Our most recent studies demonstrated an abnormal accumulation of UBB +1 in s-IBM muscle fibers, indicating for the first time, as far as we are aware, the important phenomenon of molecular misreading in diseased human muscle fibers [67]. We therefore postulate that in IBM fibers, oxidative stress combined with the aging cellular environment leads to production of mutated UBB+, which may play a detrimental role in s-IBM pathogenesis by inhibiting proteasome function, leading to the accumulation of misfolded protein aggregations.

Muscle fiber aging

s-IBM typically becomes clinically manifest after age 50, and more often in the 60s and 70s. Among patients with sporadic "inflammatory-myopathy" conditions, the above-described specific degenerative accumulations of proteins within muscle fibers occur only in s-IBM, not in polymyositis or dermatomyositis. We suggest that those accumulations are related to an aging-based degenerative pathogenic cascade.

For example, cellular aging was shown to promote the accumulation of abnormal proteins and to slow the degradation rate of normal and abnormal proteins [48••,49,51••]. The interrelated phenomena of agingrelated protein misfolding and aggregation of proteins may clarify the mechanisms relevant to s-IBM. In the cellular milieu of the aging muscle fiber, there may be diminished homeostatic mechanisms caused by either (1) diminished expression of "youthful" genes encoding beneficial cellular factors or (2) overexpression of yetunknown "aging" genes encoding toxic cellular factors. An association between aging and decreased protein sur- veillance was shown in a Caenorhabditis elegans model of polyglutamine disease in which mutation in the longevity gene "Age-1" exacerbated polyglutamine aggregation and toxicity [68]. In addition, aging changes within muscle mitochondria [69], or elsewhere in the muscle fiber, may predispose to the mitochondrial abnormalities documented in s-IBM, potentially provoking a vicious circle between mitochondrial malfunctions and the oxidative stress demonstrated in the IBM fiber.

Putative role of predisposing genes

Predisposing genes may be important to S-IBM pathogenesis.

Transthyretin Val122Ile mutation predisposes to A␤ accumulation and oligomerization in cultured human muscle fibers

We previously postulated that susceptibility genes may play a role in the pathogenesis of s-IBM [1•,2]. This could be exemplified by a patient with s-IBM and cardiac amyloidosis, associated with the Val122Ile transthyretin (TTR) mutation [70]. Because wild TTR in vitro binds A␤ and prevents its fibrillar amyloidogenesis, we hypothesized that, conversely, mutant TTR may promote A␤ deposition and amyloidogenesis, thereby facilitating the development of IBM [70]. Our newest studies in this patient's cultured muscle fibers show that his TTR Val122Ile mutation greatly exacerbated congophilia and A␤ accumulation and oligomerization, and it accelerated muscle fiber death [71••]. Accordingly, TTR Val122Ile, or another mutation could be (1) a genetic predisposition factor for IBM, triggered by an aging cellular environment and/or other factors, or (2) increasing a preexisting propensity to have s-IBM and form intramuscle fiber A␤ deposits.

Conclusion

We have presented the newest findings and approaches to the pathogenesis of s-IBM (Fig. 1). These have not yet provided a definitive cause and treatment, but they have pointed to various new, potentially exciting avenues for exploring treatment approaches that could benefit patients with s-IBM. Examples are the identification of factors that would (1) decrease the intra-muscle fiber expressions of ␤and ␥-secretases that might lead to decreased production of toxic oligomeric A␤42 and (2) detoxify free radicals or prevent their formation within muscle fibers. Those measures might decrease the production of unfolded/misfolded proteins and their toxic consequences. A better understanding of the mechanisms and consequences of human muscle fiber aging may also provide new avenues for therapy in s-IBM.

Acknowledgments

The authors thank their research and clinical colleagues and staff for their participation in various aspects of these studies.

Supported by the National Institutes of Health (NINDS grant NS34103 and NIA Merit Award AG16768), the Muscular Dystrophy Association, The Myositis Association, and the Helen Lewis and Sheldon Katz Research Funds.

proposed to be importantly related to several neurodegenerative disorders, including AD, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Huntington disease, and Parkinson disease [49-51••]. Presently, little is known regarding the mechanisms preceding and leading to the formation of the inclusion bodies in s-IBM muscle. We proposed that the unfolding of proteins preceding their binding to each other and their final aggregation into inclusion bodies are responsible for cellular toxicity [1•].

••-51••,57•]. Unfolding or misfolding of otherwise normal proteins can occur in vivo and in vitro under several circumstances, including macromolecular crowding, oxidative stress, exposure to toxins, and aging [48••-51••]. Markers of oxidative stress are increased in muscle fibers of s-IBM, and

Table 1 . Protein composition of the A␤ and P-tau intracellular inclusions in s-IBM muscle fibers1Pathogenetic cascade of inclusion-body myositis Askanas and Engel 741A␤ inclusionsP-tau inclusionsTypical morphologyLight microscopyPlaque-like, rounded;Squiggly;Electron microscopy6-10nm filaments or15-21nm paired-helicalamorphous materialfilamentsCongophilia++Various proteinsA␤+−N-and C-epitopes of A␤PP+−Bace1 and Bace2+−Cystatin C+−␣-Synuclein+−P-Tau−+Ubiquitin++Nicastrin++Presenilin 1++Caveolin 1++Prion protein, cellular++Apolipoprotein E++UBB +1++ER chaperonesCalnexin+−Calreticulin+−GRP94+−ERP72+−BiP/GRP78+−Signal transduction componentsERK−+CDK5−+Markers of oxidative stressNitrotyrosine++SOD1++Malondialdehyde++␣1-Antichymotrypsin++Transcription componentsRNA Polymerase2−+RNA−+Survival-motor-neuron protein−+c-Jun++NFB++

