Familial Inclusion Body Myositis: A Report on TwoJapanese Sisters

Familial occurrence of inclusion body myositis is extremely rare, and only a few cases in Western countries have been reported. In these reports, a strong association of this disease with DR3 (DRB1*0301/0302) and the efficacy of immunosuppressants suggested that an immune pathomechanism is involved in the disease. We, for the first time, report two Japanese sisters who suffered myopathy clinicopathologically similar to inclusion body myositis. One sister received corticosteroid and azathioprine and the therapy relieved dysphagia. Both of our patients had DR15(2)/4 (DRBl*1502/0405), suggesting a distinct genetic association with the disease in the Japanese population.

Introduction

Inclusion body myositis (IBM) is a chronic, inflammatory myopathy with characteristic clinical and histopathological features. It usually begins insidiously after middle age, and tends to affect the quadriceps femoris and finger flexors (1). Dysphagia is frequently associated (2). In the muscle pathology, rimmed vacuoles and inflammatory cellular infiltrates, especially mononuclearcell invasion in non-necrotic muscle fibers, and 15-18 nm tubulofilamentous inclusions in vacuolated muscle fibers are commonlyseen (1). Unlike other inflammatory myopathies, such as polymyositis and dermatomyositis, corticosteroid and other immunosuppressants are usually ineffective.

Familial occurrence of IBM(familial IBM) is extremely rare. It should be distinguished from hereditary inclusion body myopathies, which consist of heterogeneous diseases usually lacking inflammation in the muscle pathology (1, 3).

There are only a few reports describing familial IBM (4-7). These reports on familial IBMfrom Western countries suggest a strong association with HLA-DR3 and the therapeutic efficacy of immunosuppression (4, 5). To our knowledge, there are no reports of familial IBM from Asian countries. Wereport the clinicopathological findings, clinical outcome of immunosuppressive therapy, and HLAassociation in two Japanese sisters with familial IBM.

For editorial comment, see p 928.

Case Report

Patient 1 A 75-year-old woman noticed difficulty in climbing steps at the age of 55 years. The symptom gradually progressed and she also felt weakness in the upper extremities and difficulty in swallowing. On the first admission when she was 70 years old, neurological examination revealed dysphagia and limb muscle atrophy which was most prominent in the quadriceps femoris. Muscle strength was decreased in the neck flexor, forearms as well as the quadriceps femoris. Her  (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark), and CD4 (Dako). The sections were treated with avidin-biotin complex (Vector Elite ABC Kit, Vector, Burlingame, CA) and were visualized by 3,3'diamino-benzidine (DAB). The muscles were also fixed in 2% glutaraldehyde and embedded in Epon for electron microscopic analyses.

The muscle biopsy of Patient 1 showed advanced myopathic changes including variation in fiber sizes, increased internal nuclei, and excessive connective tissue. In addition, muscle fibers with rimmed vacuoles and inflammatory cellular infiltrates with mononuclear cell invasion in non-necrotic muscle fibers were seen (Fig. IB, C). ATPase stain revealed type 1 fiber predominance. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed CD8-positive mononuclear cells infiltrated in the endomysium. The muscle of Patient 2

showeda rather normalappearance except for muscle fibers with rimmed vacuoles and several foci of inflammatory infiltrates with mononuclearcell invasion in non-necrotic muscle fibers (Fig. 2A, B). CD8-positive mononuclear cells infiltrated in the endomysium. The distribution of the fiber types was normal. In both patients, amyloid P-protein-positive fibers and ubiquitin-positive fibers were found (Fig. 2C, D). An electron microscopic examination in Patient 1 revealed myelm-like laminated figures in vacuoles and 15-18 nm tublofilamentous inclusions in vacuolated muscle fibers 

Immunosuppressivetherapy

According to a previous report of familial IBM(5), we tried immunosuppressive therapy in Patient 1. Intravenous administration of methylprednisolone 500 mg for three days followed by oral administration of prednisolone 60 mg/day and azathioprine 100 mg/day were started when she was 72 years old. Before the therapy, she could not swallow food without drinking water. After starting the therapy, she becameable to swallow food without water in a month. The strength of her limb muscles did not change significantly. The serum CKwas normalized. Six moths later, prednisolone was tapered to 20 mg/day, but azathioprine was withdrawn because of liver dysfunction.

However, the improvement in swallowing was maintained in the 20-month follow-up. Patient 2 did not receive immunosuppressive treatment.

Discussion

Both   8). Meanwhile, the much higher frequency of T cells invading muscle fibers than congophilic amyloid-positive muscle fibers suggests the importance of an immune pathomechanism in this disease (9). In addition, IBM is occasionally associated with certain autoimmune diseases (1, 2) and the frequency of DR3 is significantly higher in IBM as well as in polymyositis and dermatomyositis in Western countries (10)(11)(12).

These findings suggest that IBM may be an immune-mediated disorder with a genetic background, though its response to immunosuppressive treatment is unremarkable.

An immunological pathomechanism was also suggested in the cases of familial IBM. In the present Patient 1, although the strength of the limbs was not improved, dysphagia was relieved with immunosuppressive therapy. This partial but distinct response to the therapy implied a significant immune pathomechanism.

A good response to immunosuppressive therapy was also described in the cases of Naumann's et al (5), in which muscle strength, especially that involved in swallowing, improved with corticosteroid and azathioprine.

Because such an efficacy of immunosuppressive therapy is unusual in sporadic IBM, the pathomechanism in some cases of familial IBM may not be identical to that of sporadic IBM.

With regard to genetic factors in familial IBM, Sivakumar et al reported that all seven American patients of familial 

Figure 1. (A) Muscle CT of the lower limbs of Patient 1 showed proximal muscle atrophy which was the most prominent in the quadriceps femoris (arrows). (B, C, D) Anterior deltoid muscle of Patient 1. (B) Modified Gomori-Trichrome stain shows muscle fibers with rimmed vacuoles (arrows). (C) Inflammatory infiltrates in endomysiumwith mononuclear cell invasion in non-necrotic muscle fibers (HE stain). (D) 15-18 nm tubulofilamentous inclusions in the cytoplasm of a vacuolated muscle fiber. Scale bar=50 um (B, C), 200 nm (D).

A-, B-, C-, DR-, and DQ-locus and DRB1* genotype) were investigated. The HLAtypes of Patient 1 and Patient 2 were identical and were A24(9)/-, B52(5

Figure 2. Triceps brachii muscle of Patient 2. (A) Rimmed vacuoles in a muscle fiber (HE stain). (B) Inflammatory infiltrates in endomysiumincluding mononuclear cell invasion in non-necrotic muscle fibers (HEstain). (C) An ubiquitin-positive muscle fiber. (D) An amyloid p-protein-positive muscle fiber. Scale bar=25 urn (A, C, D), 50 um (B).

On the other hand, an analysis of HLA in a large cohort of IBM has not been done in Japan, because of the low prevalence of IBM in Japan. Itgeneral population (about 10%) (14). represents only 3.5% of cases of inflammatorymyopathies(15).The present cases demonstratethat inflammatory,fa-milial IBM can occur in Japanese and that the genetic predis-position to familialIBM may differ among ethnic groups.Acknowledgement: The authors would like to thank Mr. Brent Bell forreading this manuscript.References1) Griggs RC, Askanas V, DiMauro S, et al. Inclusionbody myositisandmyopathies.Ann Neurol 38: 705-713,1995.2) Lotz BP, Engel AG, Nishino H, Stevens JC, Litchy WJ. Inclusionbodymyositis.Brain 112: 727-747,1989.3) Askanas V, Engel WK. New advances in the understandingof sporadicinclusion-bodymyositisand hereditaryinclusion-bodymyopathies.Curr Opin Rheumatol 7: 486-496,1995.4) Sivakumar K, Semino-Mora C, Dalakas MC. An inflammatory, famil-ial, inclusion body myositis with autoimmune features and a phenotypeidenticalto sporadicinclusionbody myositis.Brain 120: 653-661,1997.5) Naumann M, Reichmann H, Goebel HH, Moll C, Toyka KV.Glucocorticoid-sensitivehereditaryinclusionbody myositis. J Neurol243:126-130,1996.6) Amato AA, Shebert RT. Inclusion body myositis in twins. Neurology51: 598-600,1998.7) Hengstman GJ, van Engelen BG, ter Laak HJ, Gabreels-FestenAA.Familialinclusionbody myositiswith histologicallyconfirmedsensorimotor axonal neuropathy. J Neurol 247: 882-884, 2000.8) Askanas V, Engel WK. Inclusion-bodymyositis:newest concepts ofpathogenesisand relationto agingand Alzheimerdisease.JNeuropathol Exp Neurol 60: 1-14, 2001.9) PruittJN II, ShowalterCJ, Engel AG. Sporadic inclusionbodymyositis:counts of different types of abnormal fibers. Ann Neurol 39:139-143,1996.10) Rider LG, Gurley RC, Pandey JP, et al. Clinical,serologic,andimmunogenetic features of familial idiopathicinflammatory myopathy.ArthritisRheum41:710-719,1998.l) Koffman BM, Sivakumar K, Simonis T, Stroncek D, Dalakas MC.lHLA allele distribution from hereditary inclusion distinguishes body myopathies. sporadic inclusion body myositis J Neuroimmunol 84:139-142,1998.12) Garlepp MJ, Laing B, Zilko PJ, Oilier W, Mastaglia FL. HLA associa-tions with inclusionbody myositis.Clin Exp Immunol 98: 40-45,1994.3) Furuya T, Hakoda M, Higami K, et al. Association of HLA class I and1class II alleles with myositis in Japanese patients.J Rheumatol 25:IBM had DR3 allele same genetic susceptibility (DRB1*0301/0302), as seen in sporadic IBM, suggesting the11109-1114, 4) Imanishi T, Akaza T, Kimura A, Tokunaga K, Gojobori T. Allele and 1998. haplotype frequencies for HLA and complement loci in various ethnicpolymyositis,and dermatomyositis(4). Such a DR3 associa-groups. In: HLA 1991:Proceedingsof the EleventhInternationaltion was not seen in the present patients, both of whom hadHistocompatibilityWorkshop and Conference. Tsuji K, Aizawa M,DR15(2)/4 polymyositis and dermatomyositis, (DRB1* 1502/0405). different from those associatedIn Japanese patients with the HLA types are quite with Caucasian patients (13).Sasazuki 5) Murakami N, Takemitsu M, Kurashige T, Nonaka I. Significance T, Eds. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1992: 1065-1220. rimmed vacuoles in neuromuscular disorders -a comparative immuno-of histochemical study of inclusion body myositis and distal myopathyDR3 is rare not only in Japanese patients with polymyositiswith rimmed vacuole formation. Rinshou Shinkeigaku(Clin Neurol)and dermatomyositis(13), but also in the Japanese general134: 782-787,1994 (in Japanese, Abstract in English).population(0.2%),whileDR3 is common in the Caucasian1038Internal Medicine Vol.42, No.10 (October2003)

