Increase in Transglutaminase 2 in Idiopathic Inflammatory Myopathies

Idiopathic inflammatory myopathies (IMs), including dermatomyositis (DM), polymyositis (PM), and sporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM), are characterized by inflammatory cell infiltration in muscle tissue and muscle fiber destruction, which leads to muscle weakness. Although the cause of IMs is unclear, an autoimmune pathogenesis may be involved in initiating the muscle inflammation. Recently, we have found an aberrant expression of transglutaminase 2 (TGase 2) in s-IBM, which is closely associated with insoluble inclusion body formation. TGase 2 is a cross-linking enzyme that generates a conformational change of molecules via a covalent isopeptide bond. The increase in the level of TGase 2 expression and the inappropriate presentation of substrates/cross-linked aggregates to the immune system may contribute to the autoimmune aspects of IMs. We investigated whether or not an increase in TGase 2 expression is a common factor in muscle inflammation. Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) and normal tissues were employed as controls. Using immunocytochemistry and quantitative RT-PCR, the level of TGase 2 expression was found to be specifically increased in PM and DM, but not in DMD and normal controls. Therefore, the targeting of TGase inhibition in IMs will be a challenging therapeutic approach that should be investigated in the near future.

Introduction

Idiopathic inflammatory myopathies (IMs) are a heterogeneous group of subacute or chronic muscle disorders. They are sharing the common and characteristic feature of muscle degeneration mediated by an inflammatory process [1][2][3][4]. IMs are currently treated with immunosuppressants or immunomodulating drugs. However, some of the patients are resistant to these therapies [5,6].

Although the precise role of transglutaminase 2 (TGase 2; EC 2.3.2.13) in the normal development of muscle as well as in IMs has not yet been uncovered, there are several suggested roles of TGase 2. TGase 2 is a calcium-dependent cross-linking enzyme that forms an isopeptide N Â -(Á-glutamyl)lysine bond between the peptide-bound glutamine and lysine residues [7]. In this way, TGase 2 stabilizes the intra-and extracellular proteins into macromolecular assemblies, which are used for a variety of essential physiological purposes such as apoptosis [8], and extracellular matrix formation [9][10][11][12]. Also, TGase 2 may contribute to the stability of the postsynaptic cholinergic system because it is detected at the neuromuscular junc-Increase in Transglutaminase 2 in Idiopathic IMs tions during normal neural development [13]. Bernsten et al. [14] demonstrated that a treatment with a TGase inhibitor on myoblasts inhibits myotube formation. Therefore, TGase 2 might play an important role in the cytoskeletal network formation during the developing myotubes. There have been a number of studies that have reported the presence of TGase 2 in muscle tissues [15][16][17]. Also, we found that TGase 2 expression is increased in s-IBM [18]. In many degenerative neurological diseases, inappropriate cross-linking by TGases may lead to pathological conditions [19].

Recent studies have shown that TGase 2 plays an important role in the pathogenesis of inflammatory autoimmune diseases including celiac disease [20], dermatitis herpetiformis [21], atherosclerosis [22], and diabetes mellitus [23]. TGase 2 is involved in the formation of inflammatory lesions and the generation of autoantibodies. These reports show that TGase 2 is not only involved in wound healing and matrix formation, but is also closely involved in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases, although the detail mechanism is uncertain. Recently, it has been discovered that TGase 2 expression is significantly higher in the muscle lesions of sporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM), which is associated with the formation of insoluble protein inclusions in s-IBM [18]. We also found that TGase 2 expression could be increased by IFN-Á in the intestinal cell line [24]. This raises the question as to whether this is specific to s-IBM or general in IM. We investigated the expression of TGase 2 in IMs, which is potentially associated with the pathogenesis of IMs.

Materials and Methods

Frozen sections of muscle biopsy specimens from well-characterized patients with IMs, including 4 patients with polymyositis (PM) and 4 with dermatomyositis (DM), were studied. Control specimens from 2 patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) and 2 normal subjects were also examined. All tissues were obtained with informed consent at the Severance Hospital (Seoul, Republic of Korea). The tissues were processed for immunocytochemistry and TGase mRNA by RT-PCR according to the following procedures.

Semiquantitative PCR Analysis for TGase 2

To prepare the total RNA for RT-PCR, muscle tissues from the IM and control samples were homogenized directly in a glass tube using a Teflon pestle by adding TRIZOL reagent (100 mg/ml; Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Reverse transcription of the total RNA (1 Ìg) to cDNA was performed at 42 °C using AMV reverse transcriptase (Roche). The reaction mixture was incubated at 25 °C for 10 min, at 42 °C for 1 h, and finally at 99 °C for 5 min. The mixture was then stored at 4 °C. To perform semiquantitative PCR, mimic templates (internal amount control) of TGase 2 were made from the 1,833-to 2,412-bp sequence of human TGase 2 containing the RT-PCR primer sequences at both ends. RT-PCR primers were made from the 1,833-to 2,530-bp sequence of human TGase 2. Therefore, the RT-PCR products gave a 697-bp sequence for the target TGase 2, and a 579-bp sequence for the mimic TGase 2. The PCR primer sequences are the TGase 2 sense strand (5)-CCT CGT GGA GCC AGT TAT CAA C-3)), and the TGase 2 antisense strand (5)-TAT GGT GGG TGG TCA ATG GC-3)). The PCR reaction was done with the condition of 1 cycle of 95 °C (2 min), 25, 30 or 35 cycles of 95 °C (30 s), 55 °C (30 s), and 72 °C (30 s), and 1 cycle of 72 °C (7 min) using the PCR 9600 machine (Perkin Elmer). All PCR reactions were contained in 20 Ìl: 1.5 mM MgCl 2 , 200 ÌM dATP, dGTP, and dTTP, 100 ÌM dCTP, 10 ÌCi 32 P-dCTP (3,000 Ci/mmol), 0.2 ÌM of each sense and antisense primers, 0.5 unit of the Taq polymerase, templates from 0.05 Ìg total RNA and 1 fM of the mimic standard. The RT-PCR products were separated on a 6% TBE gel (Novex) and scanned using a phosphoimager (Molecular Dynamics). The ratio of the target amount per standard amount was calculated. The values are the means of three different results within a ! 10% standard deviation. To confirm the cDNA sequences, the RT-PCR products were excised from the gel, ligated into a T-vector (Novagen), and sequenced using the Sanger method. The sequences were matched to the human TGase 2 cDNA sequences. RT-PCR data had to be obtained before the PCR reactions reached the plateau phase. To control the variation in the amplification efficiency and determine the comparative values of mRNA, internal standards (competitive mimics) were employed [25]. This technique allows a comparison of the expressional level of the mRNAs between different samples.

Immunocytochemistry

In order to confirm these RT-PCR data, the localization of TGase 2 was examined using immunohistochemical staining of the muscle tissues from the patients with IMs, and DMD, and from normal individuals using antibodies highly specific to TGase 2 [26]. Sevenmicrometer serial sections were fixed in acetone at 4 °C for 10 min, rinsed in 0.05 mol/l Tris-buffered saline (pH 7.5) for 15 min, and incubated for 30 min with a blocking solution containing 2% bovine serum albumin and 5% normal goat serum, as described [18]. The sections were then incubated overnight at 4 °C with polyclonal antihuman TGase 2, diluted 1:200, made in rabbit [26]. After being washed for 30 min in Tris-buffered saline, the sections were incubated with biotinylated goat antirabbit IgG followed by fluorescent isothiocyanate avidin D (Vector Laboratory). The slides were mounted in Vectashield (Vector) and examined using a microscope equipped with epifluorescence optics. The controls for the staining specificity were: preabsorption of the primary TGase 2 antibodies with the corresponding specific protein antigens; omission of the primary antibody, or its replacement with nonimmune serum.

Results

Expression of TGase 2 mRNA Is Increased in IMs

TGase 2 expression in myopathy samples and normal controls was analyzed by semiquantitative RT-PCR using competitive mimics of TGase 2. TGase 2 expression in IMs increased 2-to 3-fold compared with that in the nor-Eur Neurol 2004;51:10-14 Choi/Kim/Kim  mal controls, but not in DMD (fig. 1). This result was confirmed twice by RT-PCR with the 4 PM, 4 DM, and 2 DMD patients, and the 2 normal subjects. The standard deviation is marked on the graph (fig. 2).

Localization of TGase 2 by Immunocytochemistry

The anti-TGase 2 staining was notably increased in the endomysial connective tissue and sarcolemma of the degenerative muscle fibers in DM and PM (fig. 3). In DM, the TGase 2 was expressed in the muscle fibers in the perifascicular area. In PM, the TGases 2 was also expressed in the nonnecrotic muscle fibers. In DMD patients and in normal controls, TGase 2 positively stained some of the endomysial connective tissues, but not as strong as observed in the IMs.

Discussion

In this study, we have investigated whether or not increased TGase 2 expression is specific to s-IBM or is a common feature in IMs. We found that the TGase 2 expression level is increased in PM and DM, but not in DMD and normal controls.

Although the cause of IMs has not yet been revealed, there are a lot of pathological evidences suggestive of an autoimmune disease [3]. In DM, the endomysial inflammation and muscle fiber destruction is preceded by the activation of the complement system of plasma proteins, and the deposition of membranolytic attack complex on the endomysial capillaries [2]. In PM, and probably s-IBM, the disease begins with the activation of CD8+ T cells [3]. These cytotoxic T cells reach the endomysial parenchyma to recognize the muscle antigen(s) associated with the upregulation of the major histocompatibility complex class I antigen on the muscle fibers [27,28]. Recent studies have provided evidence for the upregula-tion of various immunologically relevant cell surface molecules, cytokines, and chemokines. These phenomena suggest that skeletal muscle cells actively contribute to the immune inflammation by expressing a wide variety of surface molecules, and cytokine/chemokines.

TGase autoantibodies have been found in a number of autoimmune diseases including celiac disease [20], dermatitis herpetiformis [21], and diabetes [23], which suggests that the inappropriate presentation of TGases to T cells might contribute to the pathogenesis. Although the detail mechanism of TGase 2 in CD development has not been uncovered, there is convincing evidence showing that TGase 2 plays an important role in the formation of a neoantigen by modifying the innate proteins. Based on a series of in vitro experiments, TGase 2 is believed to be responsible for generating the neoepitopes of gliadin through deamidation of the glutamine residues [29]. HLA-DQ molecules have low affinity for unmodified peptides derived from gliadin [30]. However, TGase 2 treatment in vitro significantly increases the ability of the gliadin fragments to stimulate the proliferation of gliadinspecific T cells [29,31,32].

The abnormal deposition of cross-linked proteins including amyloids and other unknown proteins may induce muscle fiber destruction in s-IBM, as proposed by Increase in Transglutaminase 2 in Idiopathic IMs Askanas and Engel [4]. Interestingly, we found that the total TGase activity was elevated 16-fold in the diseased tissue, which is reflected in an increased number of products from TGase catalysis, Â(Á-glutamyl)lysine cross-links, from F2/10,000 in normal muscle to F60/10,000 residues [18]. TGase 1 and 2 colocalize with the amyloid deposits in vacuolated muscle fibers from patients with IBM [18]. This finding suggests that TGase 2 may play a key role in the formation of inflammation in s-IBM. The main question now is how the TGase 2 levels can be specifically increased in the muscle lesion. Chronic inflammation in myopathy causes a local increase in inflammatory cytokines such as IFN-Á and TNF-• [33], which can increase the local TGase 2 expression in IEC-6 cells [24]. It was also found that TNF-• and IFN-Á increase the level of expression of the TGase 2 enzyme at both the mRNA and protein/activity levels in cultured myoblasts in a time-and dose-dependent manner (unpubl. data). The subsequent production of proinflammatory cytokines may then stimulate the TGase expressions, which in turn catalyzes the deamination or polymerization of TGase substrates, such as ß-amyloid in the affected muscle of s-IBM, causing a progressive pathology.

In conclusion, abnormal cross-linked deposits may be processed for the presentation to the immune system as neoantigens, as suggested in celiac disease [19,20]. Antigen presentation in muscle cells promotes T cell activation, and thereby exacerbates the T-cell-mediated cytotoxicity against the damaged muscle fibers. Here we discovered that increase in TGase 2 expression is associated with the IMs accompanied with T cell infiltration such as s-IBM, PM, and DM, but not with DMD. Therefore, the targeting of TGase inhibition in IMs is a challenging therapeutic approach that should be investigated further in the near future.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by grant No. R02-2000-00186 to Dr. Choi from the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation.

Fig. 1 .1Fig. 1. Semiquantitative RT-PCR of TGase 2 (TG 2) in myopathies and normal controls (NL): the RT-PCR products gave 697 bp for the target TGase 2, and 579 bp for the mimic template (internal amount control) of TGase 2.

Fig. 2 .2Fig. 2. Increased expression of TGase 2 mRNA by semiquantitative RT-PCR: the relative expression of TGase 2 mRNA was increased up to 2-to 3-fold in IMs. These data are the mean B SD. NL = Normal control.

Fig. 3 .3Fig. 3. Immunohistochemical analyses of TGase 2: indirect immunofluorescence staining of TGase 2 was performed with frozen sections of DM, PM, DMD and normal muscles. TGase 2 was strongly stained in the endomysial connective tissue and sarcolemma in IMs. TGase 2 also decorates in the degenerative muscle fibers in IMs (arrow in DM indicates degenerative muscle fibers in perifascicular areas and arrows in PM indicate nonnecrotic muscle fiber and regenerative muscle fiber). Scale bar: 50 Ìm. NL = Normal control.

