Cytokines, chemokines, and cell adhesion molecules in inflammatory myopathies

The inflammatory myopathies include dermatomyositis (DM), polymyositis (PM), and sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM). In DM, the main immune effector response appears to be humoral and directed against the microvasculature, whereas in both PM and s-IBM, cytotoxic CD8 ϩ T cells and macrophages invade and eventually destroy nonnecrotic muscle fibers expressing major histocompatibility complex class I. The need for more specific and safer therapies in inflammatory myopathies has prompted researchers to better decipher the molecular events associated with inflammation and muscle fiber loss in these diseases. The complex specific migration of leukocyte subsets to target tissues requires a coordinated series of events, namely activation of leukocytes, adhesion to the vascular endothelium, and migration. Cell adhesion molecules (CAM) and chemokines play a major role in this multistep process. In addition, cytokines by stimulating CAM expression and orchestrating T-cell differentiation also influence the immune response. This review focuses on recent advances in defining the molecular events involved in leukocyte trafficking in inflammatory myopathies. Specific topics include a concise summary of clinical features, pathological findings and immunopathology observed in inflammatory myopathies, background information about cytokines, chemokines and cell adhesion molecules, and the expression of these molecules in inflammatory myopathies.

The inflammatory myopathies, including dermatomyositis (DM), polymyositis (PM), and sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM), are a heter-ogeneous group of muscle disorders that are defined by acquired muscle weakness and inflammatory infiltrates of muscle tissue. 50,76,128 There is evidence that these diseases are secondary to an autoimmune process that probably results in muscle injury. However, the antigens eliciting the immune responses still remain unknown. Each category of inflammatory myopathies is characterized by clinical, morphological, and immunopathological features. 34,105 Inflammatory myopathies are currently treated with immunosuppressive or immunomodulating drugs, but a number of patients (especially with s-IBM) are unresponsive or are left with reduced muscle function. 9,64,121 The need for more specific and safer therapies has prompted researchers to better decipher the molecular events associated with inflammation and muscle fiber loss in inflammatory myopathies.

The complex specific migration of leukocyte subsets to target tissues is oriented by interactions of leukocytes with the endothelium. During the last 15 years, understanding of the role of cytokines, chemokines, and cell adhesion molecules in the trafficking of inflammatory cells has grown substantially, and it has been shown that nonimmune cell types, such as skeletal muscle cells, actively contribute to inflammation by synthesizing such molecules. 27,45,108,117,127 This review focuses on recent advances in defining the molecular events involved in leukocyte trafficking in inflammatory myopathies. Specific topics include a concise summary of clinical features, pathological findings and immunopathology observed in inflammatory myopathies, background information about cytokines, chemokines, and cell adhesion molecules, and the expression of these molecules in inflammatory myopathies.

IDIOPATHIC INFLAMMATORY MYOPATHIES Clinical Features.

Dermatomyositis. DM occurs at any age with two peaks of higher incidence: 5-15 (juvenile DM) and 45-65 years. The female-to-male ratio is 2:1. In addition to proximal and symmetrical muscle weakness, patients develop characteristic skin changes.These include heliotropic erythema of the eyelids, cheeks, and trunk, chronic skin lesions including pigmentation abnormalities, erosion of the knuckles, and subcutaneous calcifications in later stages (mainly juvenile DM). Changes around the fingernails, consisting of cuticular overgrowth and nail-bed telangiectasia are frequent findings. Raynaud's phenomenon as well as cutaneous or intestinal ulcerations as a sign of generalized vascular injury may be observed. 50,65 In children, cardiac involvement may occur.

The incidence of malignancies in patients over 40 years of age is much higher with DM than with PM. Associated malignancies are not observed in juvenile DM. Overlap syndromes may be observed as in PM, but there is no association with viral infections.

Laboratory studies may show an inflammatory syndrome, increased serum creatine kinase (CK) level, and myositis-specific auto-antibodies. Electromyogram typically shows alterations in the motor unit potentials and the appearance of abnormal muscle-fiber irritability. 33 Polymyositis. PM occurs in adults, with a female predominance (2:1). There is proximal and symmetrical muscle weakness. Up to 50% of patients have muscle pains and arthralgias. Cardiac involvement may occur during all stages of the disease. Interstitial lung disease, often associated with anti-JO1 antibodies (directed against histidyl transfer RNA syn-thetase) suggests a poor prognosis and is observed in about 10% of patients.

PM may occur separately or in conjunction with other autoimmune diseases (overlap syndromes) such as scleroderma, Sjo ¨gren's syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus or rheumatoid arthritis, and with viral infections, especially HIV or HTLV-I. 22,35 The association of PM with various retroviruses resulting in disease immunopathologically identical to idiopathic PM suggests that retroviruses can trigger inflammatory myopathies. 33 Associated malignancies, preceding or following the onset of PM, may be observed.

Laboratory studies may show an inflammatory syndrome, elevation of serum muscle enzymes (especially creatine kinase), and myositis-specific autoantibodies, but there is no evidence that these antibodies play a pathogenetic role in the disease. 128 The antisynthetase antibodies may help to define the antisynthetase syndrome (myositis overlapping with polyarthritis, Raynaud's phenomenon, and interstitial lung disease). Electromyography typically shows a nonspecific myopathic pattern. 50,65 Sporadic Inclusion-Body Myositis. This occurs in patients older than 50 years, with a male-to-female predominance (3:1). Patients with s-IBM have a unique pattern of selective muscle weakness that involves certain distal and proximal muscle groups. 64 Asymmetrical involvement is frequent. The disorder can be associated with systemic autoimmune diseases in up to 15% of cases. In spite of being considered an inflammatory myopathy, patients do not respond to antiinflammatory therapies and the risk of patients becoming severely disabled and wheelchair-bound within 10 -15 years after onset is high. Some authors have suggested that s-IBM should no longer be grouped among the inflammatory myopathies. 126 Laboratory studies are usually unhelpful: serum creatine kinase levels are moderately increased and erythrocyte sedimentation rate is normal in twothirds of patients. Electromyography typically shows a mixed myopathic and neurogenic pattern.

Pathological Findings and Immunopathology.

Dermatomyositis.

Muscle biopsy in DM typically shows evidence for vascular injury. This includes endothelial alterations as shown by light and electron microscopic studies, tubuloreticular profiles in endothelial cells, thrombosis, and infarction 42,50 (Fig. 1A,B).

Quantitative morphological analyses suggest that depletion of capillaries is one of the early changes in DM 83 and may be observed before inflammatory changes. 47 Microvascular deposition of C5b-9, the membranolytic attack complex (MAC) of the complement pathway, is detected on the endomysial capillaries early in the disease where it forms immunoreactive microthrombi 83 (Fig. 1D). Perivascular inflammatory exudates are mainly composed of macrophages, CD4 ϩ , and 〉 lymphocytes 49 (Fig. 1E,F). In addition, one major find- ing which is suggestive of DM, even in the absence of an inflammatory infiltrate, is perifascicular atrophy. It may be absent, however, especially in adult patients.

The mechanism leading to perifascicular atrophy is unclear. It is generally assumed that it reflects hypoperfusion of the fascicle. Interestingly, affected fibers share with regenerative fibers the expression of the neural cell adhesion molecule NCAM and its polysialylated isoform. 56 In contrast to PM and s-IBM, class I MHC expression in DM is usually restricted to perifascicular fibers (atrophic or not) 7,55,77 (Fig. 1C).

Taken together, the data summarized above suggest that the main immune effector response in DM is humoral and directed against the endothelial cells of the microvasculature.

Polymyositis and Sporadic Inclusion-Body Myositis.

In both PM and s-IBM, muscle biopsy shows randomly distributed necrotic fibers undergoing phagocytosis, and regenerative fibers. The most salient feature common to both PM and s-IBM is endomysial inflammatory exudates and partial invasion of nonnecrotic muscle fibers (Fig. 2A,C). It is for this reason that we have chosen to group PM and IBM together, although some pathological features are radically different in these two diseases.

In contrast to PM, muscle biopsy in s-IBM also shows rimmed vacuoles in muscle fibers filled with whorls of membranes and abnormal tubulo-filamentous inclusions measuring 14 -18 nm in diameter by electron microscopy. These filaments may also be observed within nuclei. Clusters of small-diameter angular fibers are observed as well as numerous mitochondrial changes. 54 Numerous vacuolated fibers contain foci of amyloid deposits. Inclusions are immunoreactive with anti SMI-31, a monoclonal antibody that recognizes phosphorylated tau. Inclusions are also immunoreactive with antiubiquitin antibody and accumulate several proteins that accumulate in the brain of patients with Alzheimer's disease, such as ␤-amyloid precursor protein epitopes, ␤-amyloid, and presenilin1. 9,121 The observation that the s-IBM muscle-fiber immunohistochemical phenotype has features remarkably similar to those of the Alzheimer's disease brain are intriguing 9 and raise new insights into the pathogenesis of the disease. 9,121 In PM and s-IBM, cytotoxic CD8 ϩ T cells and macrophages focally surround and invade nonnecrotic muscle fibers 8 (Fig. 2D). Up to 50% of the CD8 ϩ autoinvasive T cells express class II MHC suggesting that they are activated 48 and the vast majority of the inflammatory CD4 ϩ and CD8 ϩ T cells express the RO isoform of the leukocyte common antigen CD45 and therefore, are memory T cells. All of the invaded fibers and numerous noninvaded fibers express increased amounts of class I MHC molecules 7,46,77 on their cell surface membranes (Fig. 2B) and some also express class II MHC. 51,118 Interestingly, in PM, almost all muscle fibers strongly express class I MHC, whereas in s-IBM, the expression is higher in the fibers showing partial invasion or located near inflammatory exudates. 57,77 In PM, a strong class I MHC expression may be observed on muscle cell surface membrane even in muscle biopsies devoid of inflammatory exudates 120,124 (Fig. 2E,F).

In contrast, skeletal muscle fibers do not constitutively express or display MHC molecules. Therefore it is logical to assume that a response mediated by class I MHC restricted cytotoxic T lymphocytes against antigens expressed on muscle fibers occurs in both PM and s-IBM. Consistent with this hypothesis are the findings observed by immunoelectron microscopy: CD8 ϩ T cells show spike-like processes that traverse the basal lamina and invade the sarcolemma of nonnecrotic muscle fibers 48,49 and CD8 ϩ T cells expanded from muscle of patients with different inflammatory myopathies (IM) show low but significant cytotoxicity against autologous myotubes. 66 Moreover, recent findings support the concept that the autoinvasive CD8 ϩ T cells are specifically selected and clonally expanded in situ. They exhibit gene rearrangement of their T-cell receptor (TCR) and restricted amino acid sequences in the complementary determining region 3 (CDR3). 18,104 In addition, clonal restriction of TCR expression has been shown to persist over time in s-IBM muscles. 4 Interestingly, increased expression of the matrix metalloproteinases MMP-9 and MMP-2 have been reported in the nonnecrotic and class I MHC-expressing muscle fibers in PM and s-IBM, whereas the autoinvasive cytotoxic T cells expressed MMP-9. It is likely that the MMPs, by degrading the main component of the basal lamina, collagen IV, facilitate lymphocyte adhesion and enhance T-cell-mediated cytotoxicity. 26 It has been suggested that several infiltrating cells in inflammatory myopathies have dendritic cell morphology and immunological properties.

The mechanisms leading to muscle fiber death in both PM and s-IBM are still a matter of debate. 65 Briefly, two main mechanisms may occur. The first involves the secretion of the pore-forming protein perforin by the cytotoxic T cells. 63 The second relies on the interaction of the Fas ligand that is upregulated during T-cell activation, with the apoptosisinducing Fas receptor on the target cell. Although some studies have reported that many muscle fibers in inflammatory myopathies express Fas, 16,59 others have shown the expression of antiapoptotic molecules suggesting that muscle fibers are resistant to Fas-mediated injury. 16,89,115,142 In keeping with that finding is the lack of nuclear changes typical of apoptosis in muscle of affected patients. In addition, mechanisms of muscle fiber loss in s-IBM likely involves other mechanisms that will not be discussed here. 8,12,121 In spite of these results, the antigens eliciting the immune response as well as the putative immunological role of muscle cells are still unknown.

GENERAL MECHANISMS OF INFLAMMATION

The complex specific migration of leukocyte subsets to target tissues requires a coordinated series of events, namely activation of leukocytes, adhesion to the vascular endothelium, and migration. Cell adhesion molecules (CAM) and chemokines play a major role in this multistep process. In addition, cytokines by stimulating CAM expression and orchestrating T-cell differentiation also influence the immune response (Fig. 3).

Cytokines. Cytokines are regulatory proteins secreted by white blood cells and a variety of other cells in the body. Most cytokines are simple polypeptides or glycoproteins with a molecular weight of 30 kDa or less. Constitutive production of cytokines is usually low or absent; production is regulated by various inducing stimuli at the level of transcription or translation. Cytokine production is transient and they mainly act locally by binding to the cell of their origin (autocrine) or to a neighboring target cell (paracrine). Cytokines bind to specific high-affinity cell surface receptors (Kd in the range 10 Ϫ9 to 10 Ϫ12 M). Many cytokine receptors can be grouped into families on the basis of common structural findings. 144 Because of the tremendous efficiency of cytokines, their activities have to be tightly controlled. Endogenous cytokine inhibitors exist that interfere with the binding of the cytokine to its specific receptor. It is not surprising therefore that new therapeutic agents that may interfere with the binding of cytokines to their receptors have recently been developed.

Despite the identification of many structurally distinct cytokines (more than 150 cytokines have been cloned to date), they can be organized into groups that exhibit functional similarities on the basis of shared receptor utilization (Table 1, reviewed elsewhere 144 ). According to their main biological role in inflammation, cytokines may also be subdivided as pro-inflammatory cytokines or monokines (because they are mainly produced by monocytes: IL-1 and TNF), cytokines involved in T-cell differentiation (type 1 and type 2 cytokines), and cytokines of the TGF-␤ family that promote wound healing and fibrosis. 106,130 Pro-Inflammatory Cytokines. Two major molecules belong to this group: IL-1 and TNF.

IL-1 is mainly produced by activated macrophages but also by other cells such as endothelial cells. There are two functionally almost equivalent forms of IL-1, designated IL-1 ␣ and IL-1 ␤. Both forms of IL-1 bind to the same receptors (type 1 and type 2 receptors) and show similar biological activi- ties. They act on target cells both directly and via the induction of further cytokines. The main biological activity of IL-1 is the stimulation of T helper cells, which are induced to secrete IL-2 and to express IL-2 receptors. It also acts directly on B cells, promoting their proliferation and the synthesis of immunoglobulins. IL-1 also upregulates adhesion molecule expression on endothelial cells and is a strong chemoattractant for leukocytes.

Systemically, IL-1 acts as an endogenous pyrogen, and induces glucocorticoid synthesis and the release of prostaglandins, collagenase, and acute phase proteins. The synthesis of IL-1 can be induced by other cytokines, including TNF-␣ and IFN.

Two molecular species of TNF are known as TNF-␣ (cachectin) and TNF-␤ (lymphotoxin). 19,20 Usually the term TNF alone refers to TNF-␣. In the immune system, TNF is secreted by macrophages, monocytes, neutrophils, T cells, and NK cells following their stimulation by bacterial lipopolysaccharides. CD4 ϩ T cells but not CD8 ϩ secrete TNF-␣. Various cytokines control the production of TNF-␣: IL-2, IFN, and GM-CSF stimulate its production, whereas IL-6 and TNF-␤ inhibit it. There are two forms of TNF-␣: a transmembrane 26-kDa form and a 17-kDa secreted mature form. 43 The multiple activities of TNF are mediated through two distinct but structurally homologous TNF receptors of 55 kDa (TNF-R1 or CD 120a) and 75 kDa (TNF-R2 or CD 120b). 103 Although it is generally believed that TNF-R1 is responsible for most of the biological action of TNF, differential effects of the two receptor subtypes have been observed in TNF-mediated adhesion of leukocytes to the endothelium. Engagement of TNF-R1 specifically leads to the induction of the cellular adhesion molecules ICAM-1, E-selectin, VCAM1, and CD44, whereas engagement of both receptors induces ␣2 integrin expression. TNF-␣ has pleiotropic effects. It causes cytolysis of many cell types. Concerning the immune response, it induces synthesis of IL-1 and prostaglandin E2 and stimulates both the phagocytosis and the synthesis of superoxide dismutase in macrophages.

In leukocytes, TNF stimulates the expression of MHC class I and II antigen and the production of IL-1. 153 In vivo, TNF-␣ and IL-1 are responsible for many alterations of the endothelium. 106 Briefly, they inhibit anticoagulant mechanisms and promote thrombotic processes by inhibiting the thrombomodulin/protein C anticoagulation pathway and blocking fibrin dissolution via stimulation of the type I inhibitor of plasminogen activator.

Cytokine Involved in T-Cell Differentiation. Cytokine production during an immune response can determine the outcome of the disease. The type of antigenic-specific immune response that follows antigen administration depends upon the preferential activation of CD4 ϩ T helper (T H ) cells, which are functionally heterogeneous and consist of precursor cells (T HP ), naive cells (T H0 ), T H1 , and T H2 . 111,130 T H1 and T H2 cells are derived from a common pool of precursor cells T HP which differentiate into naive T H0 cells.

The final differentiation is determined by the environment in which T H cells react to antigen stimulation; the most important cytokines that influence T H1 and T H2 differentiation are IL-12 and IL-4, respectively. The binding of cytokines to their receptors results in rapid tyrosine phosphorylation of signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs). Consistently, deficient T H1 response is observed in knock out of the STAT4 gene and deficient T H2 response in STAT6 Ϫ/Ϫ mice. 139 Besides, T H1 and T H2 cells show distinct and mutually exclusive patterns of cytokine secretion, T H1 cells secreting interferon-␥ (INF-␥) and IL-2, while T H2 cells produce IL-4 (Fig. 4). The major physiological function of IL-2, IFN-␥ , and IL-4 are, respectively, the stimulation of T-cell proliferation, potent macrophage activation with the induction of expression for the class I and II MHC proteins, and induction of the proliferation of B cells. Therefore "delayed-type" hypersensitivity responses and pathogenic autoimmunity are mediated by T H1 cells, whereas T H2 cells mediate humoral immune responses and are associated with atopic disorders and allergic responses. 130 Both T H1 and T H2 cells appear to regulate each other's functions. The fact that IL-4 and IL-10 produced by the T H2 cells inhibit the activities of T H1 cells, whereas IFN-␥ produced by T H1 cell suppresses the activation of T H2 cells provides an explanation for the inverse relationship observed between cell mediated and humoral responses. 21,101 Furthermore, IL-10 is an important regulator of inflammatory and immune response. It is a powerful inhibitor of the secretion of the pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1, TNF-␣, IL-6, and IL-8. 68 Current concepts of autoimmune diseases focus on the disease-mediating effects of T H1 cells and the protective effects of T H2 cells. 129 TGF-␤. TGF-␤ exists in at least five isoforms known as TGF-␤1 to 5 that are not related to TGF-␣. 135 TGF-␤ plays a dual role during the course of inflammatory reactions, being pro-inflammatory at first and immunosuppressive later, promoting healing and development of fibrosis. 146 TGF-␤ stimulates the synthesis of the major matrix proteins including collagen, proteoglycans, and glycosaminoglycans. It inhibits their degradation mainly by inhibiting the synthesis of neural metalloproteinases and by increasing the synthesis of proteinase inhibitors. 147 Chemokines. Chemokines are small chemoattractant proteins of 70 -130 amino acids that are produced by leukocytes and other cells. These proteins activate G protein-coupled receptors and induce cells to migrate through a concentration gradient. Some chemokines are homeostatic in nature and are constitutively produced and secreted.

They are mainly involved in lymphocyte trafficking to lymphoid organs. 32 We will focus on others which are considered inflammatory and only produced by cells during infection or pro-inflammatory stimuli. The role of these chemokines is to induce the migration of leukocytes to the injured site.

Structure of Chemokines and Their Receptors. Chemokines are divided into four families according to the number of cysteine residues which form disulfide bonds and the number of amino acids between the first two cysteines. Among the chemokines containing four invariant cysteine residues, there are the ␣, ␤, and ␥ group. The ␦ group formed by lymphotactin only (XCL1) contains two cysteines. 78 Chemokines containing an amino acid between the first two cysteines are subclassified as CXC or ␣ chemokines. If the two cysteines are adjacent to each other, the chemokines are known as CC or ␤-chemokines (Table 2). Only one molecule, fraktaline, belongs to the third category: the CX3C or ␥-chemokine, which is defined by three amino acids between the first two cysteines.

The main function of CXC chemokines is to attract neutrophils to inflammatory sites whereas CC chemokines act mainly on lymphocytes and monocytes and are involved in T H1 and T H2 inflammatory responses. Therefore CC chemokines are more likely to be involved in the inflammatory response in inflammatory myopathies than CXC chemokines (the list of ␤ chemokines is reported in  Although the sequence identity among chemokines can be quite low, the overall tertiary structure is strikingly similar. 53,122 The NH 2 -terminal binding site of the chemokines which represents the region of greatest variability is crucial for receptor signaling upon ligation.

For example, for the CCR2-binding CCL2 (MCP-1) the entire 10-residue N terminus preceding the first-cysteine is critical for activity. 11 Deletion of the N-terminal glutamate results in a marked reduction in activity and deletion of the first two residues results in conversion from an agonist to an antagonist. 153 Chemokine receptors belong to a superfamily of serpentine proteins that signal through coupled heterotrimeric G proteins. More than 20 chemokine receptors have been cloned so far. They are designated CXCR1 through 6, CCR1 through 11 (Table 2), XCR1, and CX3CR1 on the basis of whether they bind chemokines from the CXC, CC, C, or CX3C family.

Although each of these receptors binds only a single class of chemokines, they can bind several members of the same class with high affinity. For example, CCR1 binds CCL3 (MIP-1␣), CCL5 (RANTES), and CCL7 (MCP-3) among others, with high affinity. 119 Conversely, several chemokines can bind and activate a number of chemokine receptors, for example, CCL3 (MIP-1␣) binds with high affinity to CCR1, CCR3, and CCR5. 99 Major Functions of Chemokines. Chemokine receptor binding initiates a cascade of intracellular events leading to the activation not only of chemotaxis by modulating action-dependent cellular processes and up-regulating adhesion proteins, but also a wide range of functions in different leukocytes such as an increase in the respiratory burst, degranulation, phagocytosis, and lipid mediator synthesis. 11 Although chemokines bind with their specific receptors, they also interact with other molecules that may affect their oligomeric state or activity. Cell surface and soluble glycosaminoglycans bind positively charged regions on the chemokines, specific chemokines interacting with different types of glycosaminoglycans with different affinity. 86 In addition, oligomerization of chemokine occurs on glycosaminoglycans leading to enhanced concentrations of chemokines. 67 Taken together, "chemokines near the sites of production may form higher order oligomers on endothelial or extracel- lular matrix glycosaminoglycans, thereby creating and presenting higher concentrations of chemokine near the initiating inflammatory or trafficking stimulus that cause the leukocyte to move up the chemokine gradient and toward the relevant site." 122 Regulation of Chemokines and Chemokine Receptors by Cytokines. Although chemokines involved in homeostatic lymphocyte trafficking are constitutively expressed, most inflammatory chemokines are mainly induced by pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1␤, TNF-␣) or lipopolysaccharides. Chemokine receptor expression is also regulated by a variety of inflammatory stimuli. 138 Treatment of freshly isolated blood T cells with IL-2 induces the expression of CCR1, CCR2, CCR5, and CXCR3 and the cells thus become responsive to the appropriate chemokines. 94 These receptors are rapidly downregulated by stimulation with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28, which mimic the encounter with an antigen. Interestingly T H1 and T H2 showed a distinct pattern of chemokine receptor expression: CCR5 is characteristic for T H1 cells 95 and its expression can be suppressed by IL-10, 123 whereas CCR3 is characteristic for T H2 cells 131 and its expression requires the synergistic effects of IL-2 and IL-4. 74 Cell Adhesion Molecules. On the basis of their primary structure, cell adhesion molecules are divided into four families: cadherins, integrins, selectins, and the immunoglobulin superfamily.

Only molecules belonging to the last three families play a role in leukocyte migration from the vascular system to tissues. 45,75 There are four steps in this process which begins with the rolling of leukocytes along the vascular endothelium mediated by selectins, followed by signaling which activates leukocyte integrins (role of chemokines and their receptors), thus leading to tight adhesion to the endothelium, and finally by transmigration (integrins/ molecules of the Ig superfamily) (Fig. 2).

Selectin Family. It is a small family of L-, E-and P-selectins. They are characterized by a lectin-like domain attached to an EGF-type domain and a variable number of complementary regulatory protein repeat sequences, which together comprise their extracellular motifs. 136,108 P-selectin binds to P-selectin glycoprotein ligand (PSGL-1), L-selectin interacts with GlyCAM-1 and CD34, and an E-selectin monospecific ligand is E-selectin ligand (ESL-1). L-selectin is constitutively expressed by all leukocytes except activated or memory T cells. Upon leukocyte activation during rolling, L-selectin is shed rapidly from the cell surface into the circulation by cleavage at a distinct proteolytic site. 23,148 This step is crucial and controls the time of interaction of a leukocyte with the endothelium. In contrast, P-and E-selectins are expressed by endothelial cells upon inflammatory stimuli: Pselectin is recruited to the cell surface from storage in Weibel-Palade bodies, 107 whereas E-selectin is rapidly synthesized and transported to the cell surface upon exposure to TNF-␣, IL-1␤ and lipopolysaccharide. 87 In contrast, antiinflammatory cytokines such as IL-4 and IL-13 can decrease the late expression of E-selectin. 52 The inhibitory effect of IL-4 is potentiated by TGF-␤ which alone can also inhibit Eselectin expression under certain conditions. 61 Mouse models have confirmed the crucial role of selectins in the recruitment of leukocytes from the circulation. Mutants deficient for both E-and Pselectins show a severe reduction in rolling efficiency as compared with normal mice. 58 Integrin Family. These family members are heterodimers composed of noncovalently linked ␣ and ␤ subunits that traverse the cell membrane. There are at least 14 ␣ subunits and 8 or more ␤ subunits and thus many combinations are possible. 27,69 The association of the ␣ subunit and ␤ subunit and the presence of divalent cations are critical for ligand binding. 69 Most of the ␤ subunits are shared by more than one ␣ subunit. The ␤1 integrins are mainly involved in tissue organization by interacting with the extracellular matrix and the basement membranes 69 except for ␣4␤1 integrin (VLA4) expressed by leukocytes. The ␤2 integrins are expressed exclusively on leukocytes and are essential for leukocyte migration to site of inflammation. 60,136 The ␤3 integrins are expressed by platelets and cells of the megakaryoblastoid lineage. 125 The integrin ␣4␤7 is found on lymphocytes and plays a major role in the homing of intraepithelial lymphocytes to mesenteric tissue by interacting with the highly glycosylated MAdCAM-1 molecule 71,133 but also in the rolling of activated T lymphocytes along MAdCAM-1. 13,145 The major ligands for the integrins fall into two categories: cell surface molecules, that are members of the immunoglobulin superfamily [such as intercellular adhesion molecules (ICAM-1, ICAM-2) interacting with most members of the ␤2 family, vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM-1) binding to ␣4␤1, or MAdCAM-1 interacting with ␣4␤7], and a variety of large extracellular matrix proteins (such as fibronectin, vitronectin, fibrinogen, and complementary components) (Table 3).

Interaction between integrins and their ligand plays a major role in the tight adhesion of leukocytes to endothelial molecules preceding transmigration. However, integrin-mediated adhesion is regulated by modulating the affinity of the integrin for its ligand or by altering the avidity of adhesion through integrin clustering and cell spreading. Interestingly, selectins play an important role in initiating the sequential adhesion cascade by increasing the ␤2 integrin adhesiveness for ICAM 134,143 ; continuous migration requires a cycle of adhesion and detachment.

Whereas early adhesive interactions stimulate further integrin adhesion, engagement of integrins late in the adhesion sequence negatively feedback to promote detachment of the upstream adhesion. 150 ␣4␤1 integrin, initiating the adhesion of leukocyte to endothelium, enhances the adhesiveness of ␣L/M␤2 integrin for ICAM-1. Conversely, both the ␤2 and ␤3 integrins downregulate adhesion of ␣4␤1 to VCAM or fibronectin. 24,72 Chemokines play a major role in the activation of integrins (triggering) needed to stop a rolling leukocyte. Several chemokines upregulate adhesion by increasing both integrin affinity and the lateral mobility of the integrin. 31 CXCL8 (IL-8) and CCL2 (MCP-1) can trigger ␤2-integrin mediated firm adhesion of monocytes 62 on ICAM-1 expressing cells in flow chambers. CCL21 (SLC) is the only known chemokine that can trigger ␣4␤7-integrin firm adhesion of lymphocytes to MAd CAM-1.

Moreover, chemokines regulate the order and timing of integrin adhesion. 108 For example, it has been recently reported that CXCL1 (GRO␣) and CX3CL1 (fraktaline) mediate the initial firm adhesion whereas CCL2 (MCP-1) is required for the later step of leukocyte spreading and diapedesis. 100,152 Immunoglobulin Superfamily. embers of this family show one or more of a common immunoglobulin-like repeat that is characterized by two cysteines separated by 55 to 75 amino acids. 149 In the immune system, members of this superfamily play a critical role in cellular adhesion. Key members are ICAMs (1 to 5), which bind to LFA-1 (␣L␤2), and MAC 1 (␣⌴␤2) and MAdCAM-1, which bind to ␣4␤7.

Another member of this superfamily which exhibits homotypic molecular interaction is the platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1). It plays a major role in the transmigration of leukocytes through the intercellular function of endothelial cells.

Several members of the immunoglobulin superfamily, such as ICAM-2, are constitutively expressed on endothelial cells, whereas others are expressed under inflammatory stimuli. ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 are strongly induced by pro-inflammatory cytokines, including IL-1␣, IL-1␤, TNF␣ and ␤, and various inflammatory stimuli in a wide range of cell types. 109 In contrast, TGF␤ has no effect on ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 expression in human endothelial cells. 61 INF-␣ and IL-4 regulate the expression of either ICAM-1 or VCAM-1, respectively. MAdCAM-1 expression is also induced by pro-inflammatory cytokines but not PECAM-1.

Modulation of the Expression of Cytokine, Chemokine,

and Cell Adhesion Molecules by Current Immunosuppressive Therapies. Inflammatory myopathies especially PM and DM may benefit from treatment with corticosteroids or new therapeutic regimens such as intravenous immunoglobulin and a combination of cytotoxic drugs with corticosteroids. 112 Previous reports have shown that these immunosuppressive therapies act on various molecules involved in the inflammatory response. Besides, because numerous side effects occur with these therapeutic agents and also because some patients (especially s-IBM patients) do not respond to conventional immunotherapies, it is of utmost importance to set up new and more selective therapeutic strategies. The role of corticosteroids on the various molecules involved in the inflammatory process has been well studied in asthma. 93 Briefly, prednisone suppresses the activation of cells producing the cytokines involved in endothelium activation (such as IL-1, TNF, IL-4, and IL-13) and in the migration of lymphocytes (such as CCL5, CCL7, and CCL11).

Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) also acts on cytokine production in vitro. It inhibits the proliferation of T cells and the production of various cytokines released by these cells such as IL-2, IL-10, TNF␤ and ␣, and INF ␥, whereas it upregulates IL-1RA and IL8. 1,6 IVIg also acts on endothelial cells, which play a central role in the inflammatory process. IVIg inhibits the proliferation of endothelial cells and the production of various cell adhesion molecules such as ICAM-1, VCAM-1, chemokines, and cytokines induced by TNF-␣ or IL-1␤. 151 Studies in chronic heart failure have shown that modulation of chemokines and chemokine receptors (CCL3, CCR1, CCL4, CCR5, and CXCR1) may also represent an important mechanism of action of IVIg. 36 Interestingly, it has been shown that after IVIg, TGF-␤1 was downregulated in the muscle of patients with DM who had successfully responded to therapy but remained unchanged in the muscle of patients with s-IBM who did not respond. 5 Methotrexate may also exert antiinflammatory or immunomodulatory properties by influencing the production of cytokines and other soluble mediators of inflammation, as has been shown in rheumatoid arthritis. 44 It decreases the expression of the cyto-kines IL-1␤ and TNF-␣ and the adhesion molecules E-selectin and VCAM-1. Moreover, it has been shown that methotrexate suppressed TNF-induced NF-KB activation in Jurkat cells. 102 All these data provide a molecular explanation of the immunosuppressive effect of corticosteroids, IVIg, and methotrexate in various autoimmune diseases. More attractive are selective treatments based on the inhibition of one molecule or its receptor. As an example, small molecule antagonists exist for several of the chemokine receptors. 53 However, even when specific cell types are associated with a particular disease, it will be difficult to develop a single therapeutic molecule that targets the associated cell type because multiple chemokine agonists and receptors can be involved in regulating the activity of these cells. The challenge will be to identify therapeutic applications for these antagonists aimed at curing or ameliorating the effects of inflammatory myopathies.

FUNCTIONAL ROLES OF CYTOKINES, CELL ADHESION MOLECULES, AND CHEMOKINES IN INFLAMMATORY MYOPATHIES

Immunological Properties of Human Myoblasts. Several studies have reported that cultured human myoblasts may express a variety of immunologically important molecules, suggesting that muscle cells largely contribute to the immune response in inflammatory myopathies. 65,114 First, human myoblasts share with dendritic cells some molecules involved in antigen processing and presentation functions. Second, they constitutively express some pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. Third, they may respond to inflammatory stimuli by upregulating some of these molecules but also induce the expression of new ones, including cytokines, chemokines, and cell adhesion molecules (Table 4).

Human Myoblasts Express Molecules Involved in Antigen Presentation. Professional antigen-presenting cells initiate the immune response by efficiently capturing small amounts of antigen from peripheral tissues and migrating to secondary lymphoid organs, where they mature and present antigenic peptides to antigen-specific T cells to initiate the expansion and maturation of helper (CD4 ϩ ) and effector (CD8 ϩ ) T cells.

Dendritic cells are the only cells that have the capacity to activate both naive and memory T cells. When they mature, they express certain molecules that play a crucial role in the activation of naive T cells. These include the peptide-loaded class I MHC, class II MHC, adhesion molecule (CD54), costimulatory molecules [B7.1 (CD80), B7.2 (CD86 and CD40)], cytokines (IL-1, IL-12) and chemokine receptors (CCR7). It has recently been shown that nonhematopoietic cells, such as muscle cells, can be engineered to present DNA-encoded antigens by coexpressing the key costimulatory molecule CD86. 3,82 Muscle fibers share with dendritic cells the expression of some cell surface molecules 117 and likely BB-1 (a B7-related molecule that has not been molecularly defined 17,113 ) but they do not express the costimulatory molecules (CD80/CD86). Besides, CD40 is induced on cultured myoblasts by IFN-␥ stimulation.

CD40 ligation increases IL-6, IL-8, IL-5, and CCL2 (MCP-1) production by myoblasts suggesting that interaction between T cells and muscle cells via the CD40 -CD40L system contributes to the immunopathogenesis of PM/DM by increasing inflammation via cytokine production by the muscle cells. 137 Human Myoblasts Express Cytokines and Chemokines either Constitutively or after Cytokine Induction. Some cytokines and chemokines such as IL-6, TGF-␤, GM-CSF, CCCL5 (RANTES), and CCL3 ( MIP-1␣) are constitutively expressed by cultured human myoblasts, and the expression increases after cytokine stimulation. In contrast, other cytokines (IL-4, IL-10, INF-␥) are not expressed by human myoblasts, either constitutively or after cytokines stimulation. A third group [IL-I␤, CCL2 (MCP-1)] is observed after inflammatory stimuli only. 41,114 Conflicting results are reported in the literature concerning IL-1␣ and TNF-␣. Under their culture conditions, Nagaraju et al. 117 never observed IL-1␣ expression by myoblasts whereas De Rossi et al. 41 reported constitutive IL-␣ expression. TNF-␣ was only observed after pro-inflammatory cytokine treatment, 41 whereas Nagaraju et al. reported constitutive mRNA expression by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). 117 In spite of some slight differences regarding the different studies performed, all the results summarized in Table 4 suggest that muscle fibers likely contribute to the inflammatory response in inflammatory myopathies by (1) activating memory T cells rather than naive T cells as a result of the absence of costimulatory molecule, and (2) synthesizing cytokines and chemokines, creating the conditions for chronic inflammation.

Expression of Cytokines, Cell Adhesion Molecules, and

Chemokines in Inflammatory Myopathies. The better characterization of the immunopathological features in inflammatory myopathies as well as the ma- 

*Based on various reports and reviews. 41,65,117 † Conflicting results.

jor progress made in the understanding of the main molecular events involved in leukocytes trafficking and activation during the inflammatory process has prompted researchers to analyze the expression of these molecules in inflammatory myopathies. Although the main studies are descriptive and used various technical approaches with occasionally conflicting results, there is a consensus showing strong expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines, ␤ chemokines, and some CAM in inflammatory myopathies. Cytokine Expression. Most studies have been done in muscle presenting active myositis. 2,10,30,38,85,88,90,96,98,141 Almost all these studies showed strong expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines in all inflammatory myopathies, but the cytokine expression profile varies from one study to another. It suggests that the distinction between T H1 or T H2 related cytokines is not very clear although most studies suggest a main T H1 response.

By using RT-PCR, pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1␤, IL-6, and TNF-␣) were recorded in all inflammatory myopathies tested (5 DM, 3 PM, and 1 IBM), the variability of the cytokine mRNA expression being in accordance with the intensity of local inflammatory reaction, 88 irrespective of disease activity or treatment status. 2 In most cases, normal muscles do not show pro-inflammatory cytokine transcript. 2,88 Immunohistochemical and in situ hybridization studies further confirm these results and also show the cellular distribution of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Most studies report strong pro-inflammatory cytokine expression (IL-1␣, IL-1␤, TNF-␣) in inflammatory cellular infiltrates in all inflammatory myopathies. 98,141 The strong TNF-␣ expression of infiltrating macrophages was emphasized by a few studies. 85,40 Elevation of serum-soluble TNF receptors was recorded in patients presenting with PM and DM. 132 Tews and Goebel observed that IL-1␤ expression was mainly restricted to s-IBM and observed in macrophages, whereas IL-6 expression was recorded in mononuclear cells in DM. 141 Interestingly some studies also record pro-inflammatory cytokine expression in endothelial cells and muscle fibers.

Lundberg et al. 98 observed that in all patients with inflammatory myopathies, endothelial cells (capillaries, arterioles, and venules) in areas surrounded by inflammatory cells but also in areas devoid of inflammation strongly expressed IL-1␣ but not IL-1␤, whereas normal endothelial cells do not express IL-1␣ and IL-1␤. Interestingly, IL-1␣ expression in endothelial cells was also observed in muscle from patients with chronic PM or DM in which inflammatory exudates were not recorded. 120 Some authors observed both IL-1␣ and IL-1␤ immunoreactivity in endothelial cells in all inflammatory myopathies but not in normal muscles, 10 whereas others observed constitutive expression of IL-1␣ but not IL-1␤ in endothelial cells in normal muscles. 141 In addition, De Bleecker et al. 40 report both TNF-␣ and TNF␣ R1 or R2 expression in endothelial cells and observed that both TNF-␣ and TNF-␣ R1 expression was higher in DM than in PM or s-IBM, suggesting a specific role of the TNF␣ pathway in endothelial degeneration in DM. Tews and Goebel observed a selective IL-1␤ expression in s-IBM both in inflammatory cells and in some muscle fibers. 141 IL-1␣ and IL-1␤ expression were observed in all patients with DM. 10 Furthermore, it was shown that IL-1 expression was marked in regenerative fibers and in fibers showing ischemic punched-out vacuoles that correspond to areas of myosinolysis, in atrophic perifascicular fibers, and in fibers located within healing microinfarcts, suggesting a role for IL-1 in both regeneration and myofibrillar protein breakdown in inflammatory myopathies.

Some of these reported results are somewhat conflicting, probably because of differences in the methods and antibodies used and the limited number of patients investigated. Nevertheless, these studies highlight the fact that not only inflammatory cells but also endothelial cells and muscle fibers are able to produce pro-inflammatory cytokines leading to the perpetuation of the immune response in inflammatory myopathies (Table 5).

The study of cytokine production in inflammatory myopathies also shows certain discrepancies, although the main cytokines recorded are IL-2 and IFN-␥ in keeping with a T H1 immune response in all inflammatory myopathy subtypes (Fig. 5A). By RT-PCR, IFN-␥ was observed in 6 of 9 cases of inflammatory myopathy, IL-2 in 4, and IL-4 in only 2 cases 88 whereas, by using the same methodological approach, others 2 observed IFN-␥ in 3 of 14 cases studied, IL-2 and 3, IL-4 in 4, and IL-10 in 10 cases. No difference was observed with the subtype of inflammatory myopathy, disease activity, or treatment status .

Immunohistochemical examination revealed IL-2 expression in inflammatory exudates in 9 of 20 patients in one study 141 but in only 1 patient of 15 in another. 98 The authors of the latter study did not find IL-4 expression or IL-3 or IL-13 but IL-10 in 5 of 15 and GM-CSF in 8 of 15 patients. In contrast, Tews and Goebel 141 observed strong expression of IL-4 in numerous inflammatory cells in most cases (15 of  20), the expression being stronger in DM where it was recorded in all cases.

All these results suggest that in comparison with pro-inflammatory cytokines, cytokines are less expressed in inflammatory myopathies or more difficult to detect, probably because they are transiently expressed during the inflammatory process or because their production is turned off by TGF-␤, which is strongly induced and expressed in inflammatory myopathies. 29,98 TGF␤ expression was observed in blood vessels, inflammatory cells, and the extracellular matrix. 4,29,98 In muscle tissue, TGF-␤1 normally exerts an antiinflammatory effect. 5 Interestingly, in some studies the degree of TGF-␤ expression correlates with fibrosis in DM, 4,29 and both TGF-␤ and TGF-␤ mRNA were downregulated after successful immunotherapy in biopsy specimens of patients with DM. 5 An interesting study reported differential STAT1 expression in inflammatory myopathies, with higher expression in DM. 70 STAT1 is upregulated after binding of cytokine (especially INF-␥ and some growth factor) with their receptors. STAT1 expression was recorded in all mononuclear cells but also in perifascicular atrophic fibers in DM, suggesting that this cytokine in conjunction with ischemia is probably involved in perifascicular muscle fiber atrophy in IBM.

It is likely that IFN-␥ plays a major role in the pathophysiology of inflammatory myopathies. This cytokine derived from activated Th cells is a strong inducer of class I MHC expression and selectively induces a T H1 immune response. Its role in polymyositis has been highlighted in experimental models. Mice lacking the suppressor of cytokine signaling [(SOCS-1) gene] may present different phenotypes according to the presence of the IFN-␥ gene. The double-mutant SOCS-1-deficient mice homozygous for IFN-␥ (SOCS-1 Ϫ/Ϫ IFN-␥ ϩ/ϩ ) develop a fatal disease with generalized tissue damage leading to macrophage infiltration and severe depletion of T and B cells. In contrast, SOCS-1 Ϫ/Ϫ IFN-␥ ϩ/ϩ mice develop profound polymyositis in skeletal and cardiac muscles with massive CD8 ϩ T lymphocyte activation and selective infiltration of the muscle tissue. 110 Cell Adhesion Molecule Expression. Pro-inflammatory cytokine expression induces an inflammatory status that leads to an upregulation or de novo synthesis of cell adhesion molecules by endothelial cells. The interaction between endothelial cells and leukocytes depicted above allows the entry of leukocytes into muscle.

Again, most studies have shown strong expression of CAM in inflammatory myopathies (Table 6), but discrepancies occur and mainly concern selectin expression. Expression of E-selectin in all endothelial cells in PM and DM was recorded by some authors 73 whereas others 28 observed it only in arterioles and venules. E-selectin expression was not recorded in most studies. 28,39,92 P-selectin expression was observed in endothelial cells, expression being stronger in PM than in DM, and in venules than in arterioles. 73 In keeping, SLe x , a common ligand for these selectins, was recorded in infiltrating leukocytes, interstitial tissues, and endothelial cells but also in some muscle fibers.

Interestingly, Tews and Goebel never observed SLe x positive leukocytes inside muscle fibers. In con-  141 trast, the expression of E-and P-selectin and SLe x was almost absent in normal muscles. The integrin VLA4 (␣4␤1), which initiates the adhesion of leukocyte to endothelium, was observed in leukocytes in all inflammatory myopathy subtypes 140 and expression of its ligand, VCAM-1, was recorded not only in endothelial cells (mainly arterioles and venules) but also in perivascular leukocytes. 28,39,92,140 The integrin LFA1 (␣1␤2) which binds to ICAM-1 and 2 was strongly expressed by all inflammatory cells. 28,39,140 Of particular interest was the strong upregulation of ICAM-1 molecule as well as its pattern of distribution.

Endothelial cells strongly expressed ICAM-1 in all IM but the expression was stronger in endothelial cells of perimysial arterioles and venules and on some perifascicular capillaries in DM 14,28,39,140 (Fig. 6A,B). In contrast, in PM and IBM, strong ICAM-1 expression was observed on the sarcolemma of muscle cells, especially in nonnecrotic muscle fibers invaded by mononuclear cells 39,92 (Fig. 5B) suggesting that ICAM-1 not only plays a major role in leukocyte-endothelium interactions in inflammatory myopathies, with a strong upregulation in DM likely secondary to specific endothelial alterations in this disease, but also in cytotoxicity against muscle fibers by stimulating the interaction between LFA-1 positive cytokine CD8 ϩ cells with ICAM-1 expressing muscle fibers. In keeping was the correlation with the decrease in cell adhesion molecules (ICAM-1, VCAM-1, LFA-1) and also IL-1␣, IL-1␤ after corticosteroid treatment in patients with PM and DM, and the improvement of muscle function. 97 However, by measuring soluble ICAM-1 expression in the serum of patients with PM and DM, increased expression in patients with inflammatory myopathies in compar- ison with controls was observed, 84 but the serum level of sICAM-1 was not correlated with clinical characteristics of patients.

Chemokine Expression in Inflammatory Myopathies. Only one study has searched for ␣ chemokine [CXCL (IL-8)] expression by Western blot analysis and immunohistochemistry, and results showed no expression in any control muscles or muscles with inflammatory myopathies except a few endothelial cells. 98 This is not surprising because CXCL8 is a chemoattractant for neutrophils, and neutrophil infiltration is not a feature of inflammatory myopathies. In contrast, most studies have reported strong expression of ␤ chemokines in inflammatory myopathies, with some discrepancies regarding ␤ chemokine expression (Table 7).

It appears from most studies that CCL-2 (MCP-1) probably plays a major role in the pathophysiology of all inflammatory myopathies. First, CCL-2 expression is strongly upregulated 30,38,91 in comparison with normal muscle, which expresses low levels of CCL-2 by RT-PCR. 91 Second, cellular distribution and the total amount of CCL-2 differs with the underlying disease: it is higher in DM than PM or s-IBM by RT-PCR, 91 and mainly restricted to vessels by immunohistochemistry in DM, 38,91 whereas expression was strong in partial invasion in both PM and s-IBM by both in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry (Figs. 5C, 6C,D). Interestingly, in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry has shown conflicting results regarding CCL2 expression in DM. Only endothelial cells expressed the protein whereas CCL2 mRNA was found in perivascular inflammatory cells. 91 Surprisingly, CCL2 mRNA was not detected in DM. 38 Although some authors 30 reported that only vessels located near inflammatory exudates expressed CCL-2, other authors reported CCL-2 expression in all endothelial cells and vessel walls, with strongest expression in perimysial and perivascular blood vessels at sites remote from inflammatory exudates. 38 Taken together, these data suggest that in inflammatory myopathies, CCL-2 is mainly synthesized by inflammatory cells including macrophages and Th lymphocytes, whereas synthesis by endothelial cells remains unclear; these cells, however, have the ability to concentrate CCL-2 expression, which can bind endothelial proteoglycan. Because macrophages and Th lymphocytes are producers and target of CCL-2, their recruitment in inflammatory lesions may be self-perpetuating. In both PM and s-IBM, muscle fibers contribute to the local production of CCL-2 by their ability to synthesize IFN-␥ and TNF-␣ and CD40, which induce CCL-2 expression and therefore attract the inflammatory cells. In DM, CCL-2 remains mainly in endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells. In keeping is the upregulation and the cellular distribution of CCR2, the high affinity CCL-2-specific receptor in inflammatory myopathies. CCR2 exists as two isoforms, CCR2A and CCR2B, by alternative splicing of a single gene. 25 In inflammatory myopathies, we have observed by RT-PCR a selective upregulation of CCR2A in comparison to normal muscles, expression being higher in PM and s-IBM than in DM, whereas CCR2B expression was almost identical to controls. Interestingly, immunohistochemical analysis revealed selective expression of CCR2B by satellite cells, regenerating fibers, and end-plates, whereas CCR2A was observed in inflammatory cells and vessel walls. 15 Moreover, CCR2A expression was much higher in inflammatory cells invading nonnecrotic muscle fibers in both PM and s-IBM but almost absent in perivascular inflammatory exudates in DM (Figs. 5D, 6E,F).   This is likely because perivascular inflammatory cells are mainly formed by differentiated macrophages, together with CD4 ϩ and B lymphocytes. The differentiation of monocytes into macrophages results in an increased secretion of CCL-2, which is responsible at least in part for the downmodulation of its receptor CCR2. This results in an unresponsiveness of cells to CCL-2 providing an efficient regulatory system for controlling the extent of macrophage recruitment and activation and could explain the perivascular location of macrophage exudates in DM. 15 Expression of other ␤ chemokines has also been reported in inflammatory myopathies. In particular, Adams et al. 2 have shown high levels of CCL-3 (MIP-1␣) and CCL-4 (MIP-1␤) by RT-PCR. Immunohistochemical studies confirmed strong CCL-3 expression in inflammatory cells and vessels surrounded by inflammatory cells but also in extracellular matrix in all inflammatory myopathies. 30 CCL-7 (MCP-3) and CCL-17 (TARC) were not recorded. 38 Finally, studies of CCL-5 (RANTES) expression revealed discrepancies.

CCL-5 expression by RT-PCR was reported in most inflammatory myopathies 2 but the protein was not recorded either by immunohistochemistry or Western blot analysis. 37 These studies further demonstrate that results of chemokine expression must be analyzed carefully because strong discordances exist regarding the expression of mRNAs or proteins.

Finally, the expression of ␤ chemokine receptors CCR1, CCR4, and CCR5 has been recently studied by immunohistochemistry and quantitative Western blot analysis. 37 As shown in Table 2, CCR1 binds with high affinity numerous ␤ chemokines, including CCL-3, 5, 7, 14, 15, 16, and 23; CCR4 binds CCL-17 and 22; and CCR5 binds CCL-3, 4, and 5. Expression of these receptors was found in normal muscles. Strong upregulation of CCR4 and CCR5 were recorded in all inflammatory myopathies. The strong CCR4 expression is somewhat surprising in view of the lack of CCL-17 (TARC) expression in inflammatory myopathies, but expression of its other ligand, CCL-22, has not been studied as yet in inflammatory myopathies. In contrast, CCR1 expression was downregulated in all inflammatory myopathies. All these results require confirmation in order to evaluate the role of these chemokines and receptors in inflammatory myopathies.

Putative Sequence of Events in Inflammatory Myopathies.

Dermatomyositis. In DM, one of the upstream events is the MAC deposits within intramuscular capillaries and the strong production of proinflammatory cytokines such as TNF-␣ and IL-1, whose transcription is upregulated by hypoxia. These cytokines induce a functional program related to thrombosis and inflammation. First, these cytokines facilitate thrombus formation by inducing procoagulant activity which may be responsible for the infarcts observed in DM.

Second, the action of these cytokines is potentiated by MAC: they can induce, through activation of the nuclear transcription factor NF-Kappa B, the transcription of a number of cytokines including IL-8 and IL-1, chemokines (CCL-2) and cell adhesion molecules (E-Selectin, ICAM-1). 79 -81 In keeping are the strong expression of all these molecules: TNF-␣, IL-1␣, and ICAM-1 in intramuscular capillaries in DM even in some areas without inflammation. Upregulation of CAMs and CCL-2 promote leukocyte extravasation, and the interaction between CCL-2 and their receptors is likely responsible for the perivascular exudates in DM. Besides, the complex regulation of cytokine expression is responsible for macrophage, CD4 ϩ , and B lymphocyte infiltration.

Although most authors have reported a T H1 immune response with IFN-␥ and IL-2 expression, others have suggested that IL-4, which is responsible for B cell accumulation, plays a role in DM. 141 Both TNF-␣ and IFN-␥ are potent inducers of class I MHC. It is not surprising therefore that class I expression in DM is mainly observed in perifascicular areas whereas both TNF-␣ and MAC deposits are highly expressed. Furthermore, STAT1 expression, which is stimulated by INF-␥, was observed in perifascicular atrophic fibers in DM, 70 suggesting that this cytokine, in conjunction with ischemia, is probably involved in perifascicular muscle fiber pathology in DM. Finally, both IL-1␣ and TNF-␣ via an effect on nitric oxid synthase synthesis 20 may be responsible for myofibrillar loss and fiber atrophy in DM.

Polymyositis and sporadic inclusion-body myositis. In contrast to DM, the primary target of the immune response in PM and s-IBM is the muscle fibers themselves. It is not clear at present if the upregulation of class I MHC expression by muscle cells is an upstream event or even a trigger event suggested in an experimental model. 116 Nevertheless, it is worth noting that in s-IBM, class I MHC expression is found on fibers closely related to inflammatory exudates 57 whereas almost all fibers expressed it in PM even in noninflammatory cases, 120 suggesting that in these two diseases the mechanisms leading to class I MHC upregulation are, at least to some extent, distinct.

In both PM and s-IBM, it is likely that the production of proinflammatory cytokines especially IFN-␥ by an unknown trigger event acts directly on muscle fibers, leading to the production of molecules involved in antigen processing and presentation: muscle fibers express costimulatory molecules and make close contact with their counter receptors on the auto-invasive CD8 ϩ T cells. They also express class I MHC, LFA-3, and ICAM-1. ICAM-1 interact with LFA-1 expressed by auto-invasive T cells. Moreover, upon CD40 ligation by CD40L expressed by mononuclear cells, muscle fibers may increase the production of numerous cytokines such as IL-6, IL-8, IL-15, and CCL-2 137 contributing to immunopathogenesis by increasing cytokine production by muscle cells. In keeping with these results, various studies have shown the strong upregulation of CCL-2 and its receptor in partial invasion in both PM and s-IBM.

In conclusion, in spite of numerous studies showing that cytokines, chemokines, and cell adhesion molecules are involved and play a role in the pathogenesis of inflammatory myopathies, there is still a considerable lack of knowledge in these areas. In particular, it is necessary to better decipher the sequence of events involved in the production of these molecules as well as their targets and involvement in muscle fiber damage and repair, in order to offer more appropriate and selective therapy which remain hazardous in view of the complex network of molecules expressed. It will be particularly important to understand the molecular events involved at presymptomatic disease stages in order to offer the best chance of curing patients.

This work was supported by the Association Franc ¸aise contre les Myopathies and the Programme Hospitalier de Recherche Clinique 2002. We are grateful to G. Tijeras for typing the manuscript, to M. Paul for English editing, and to L. Daniel for useful comments.

FIGURE 1 .1FIGURE 1. (A) Dermatomyositis, juvenile type. A massive inflammatory cell infiltrate is present in perimysial and perivascular sites. Perifascicular atrophy is prominent. [Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E), original magnification ϫ130.] (B) Adult-type dermatomyositis. Large group of necrotic fibers involving a fascicle suggestive of infarct. (H&E, original magnification ϫ45.) (C) Dermatomyositis, juvenile type. Immunoexpression of class I MHC antigen on the membranes of muscle fibers in perifascicular area. (Anti-class I MHC, original magnification ϫ25.) (D) Dermatomyositis, juvenile type. The membrane attack complex is localized in the vascular walls and in microthrombi of capillaries. (Anti-C5b-9, original magnification ϫ100.) (E,F) Dermatomyositis, juvenile type. Inflammatory infiltrates serial sections. Inflammatory cells are stained for B cells (CD20 ϩ ) in (C), and for helper T cells (CD4 ϩ ) in (D). (Immunohistochemistry, original magnification ϫ130.)

FIGURE 2 .2FIGURE 2. (A) Adult polymyositis. Endomysial inflammatory exudates. (H&E, ϫ110.) (B) Adult polymyositis. Immunoreactivity of class I MHC on muscle fiber membranes, in regenerative fibers and nonnecrotic fibers showing partial invasion. (Anti-class I MHC, ϫ110.) (C) Adult polymyositis. Partial invasion of a nonnecrotic muscle fiber by mononuclear cells. (H&E, ϫ220.) (D) Adult polymyositis. Partial invasion. Most invading cells are CD8 ϩ lymphocytes. (Anti-CD8, ϫ150.) (E) Adult polymyositis. Noninflammatory form. Rare regenerative fibers are present. (H&E, ϫ110.) (F) Adult polymyositis. Noninflammatory form [same patient as in (E)]. Abnormal immunoreactivity of class I MHC is expressed on the membranes of muscle fibers and in regenerating fibers. (Anti-class I MHC, ϫ56.)

FIGURE 3 .3FIGURE 3.The major molecules involved in the four-step process leading to leukocyte transmigration.

FIGURE 4 .4FIGURE 4. Schematic representation of the differentiation of T H1 and T H2 cells from naive precursors (T HP ).

FIGURE 5 .5FIGURE 5. (A) Inclusion-body myositis. Immunoexpression of interferon ␥ (IFN-␥) in the mononuclear inflammatory cells of endomysial exudates and partial invasion. (Anti-IFN-␥, ϫ250.) (B) Adult polymyositis. ICAM-1 is strongly expressed on muscle-fiber cell surface, especially in fiber showing partial invasion. (Anti-ICAM-1, ϫ220.) (C) Adult polymyositis. Immunohistochemical localization of CCL2 (MCP-1). Endomysial mononuclear cells, especially cells invading nonnecrotic fibers are immunoreactive. (Anti-CCL2, ϫ220.) (D) Adult polymyositis. Numerous inflammatory cells invading nonnecrotic fibers express CCL2 receptor, CCR2A. (Anti-CCR2A, ϫ220.)

FIGURE 6 .6FIGURE 6. (A) Vascular expression of intercellular molecule-1 (ICAM-1) in a normal muscle. (Anti-ICAM-1, ϫ110.) (B) Adult-type dermatomyositis. ICAM-1 expression in capillaries, endothelial cells of larger vessels and inflammatory cells. Membranes of perifascicular fibers show a weak immunoreactivity. (Anti-ICAM, ϫ155.) (C) Adult-type dermatomyositis. Distribution of CCL2 (MCP-1) by in situ hybridization using an antisense probe. Positive cells are mainly located in perivascular and perifascicular exudates. (ϫ220.) (D) Adulttype dermatomyositis. MCP-1 detection concerns mainly the endothelial cells with a weak signal in the vascular walls. (Anti-CCL2, ϫ225.) (E) Adult-type dermatomyositis. Immunolocalization of CCL2 receptor (CCR2A). Only a few inflammatory cells are immmunoreactive. (Anti-CCR2A, ϫ110.) (F) Adult-type dermatomyositis. Distribution of CCR2A mRNA by in situ hybridization using an antisense probe. Positive cells are mainly located in inflammatory infiltrates. (ϫ 220.)

Table 1 .1Main families of cytokines involved in the inflammatory process, classified according to their receptors.General role in inflammatory processReceptor familyRepresentative ligandsPro-inflammatory cytokinesIL-1 receptor familyIL-1␣IL-1␤IL-1 receptor agonistClass I cytokine receptorsIL-6TNF receptor familyTNF-␣TNF-␤Cytokines involved in T-cell differentiationClass I cytokine receptorsIL-2IL-4IL-9IL-5IL-13IL-12Class II cytokine receptors (interferon family receptors)IFN-␥IL-10Cytokine involved in fibrosisTGF-␤ receptorsTGF-␤

Table 2 ,2and by Olson and Ley 122 ).

Table 2 .2Nomenclature of the CC␤ chemokines and their receptors.CC␤ chemokines

Table 3 .3Molecules involved in cell adhesion of inflammatory leukocytes.CAMsCellular distribution of CAMsCounter receptor or ligandCellular distribution of receptorSelectinsE-selectinCytokine-activated endotheliumSialylated Lewis-X-like structuresNeutrophils, some lymphocytesL-selectinLeukocytes (except activated orGlyCAM-1 and CD34Cells of high endothelial venulesmemory cells)P-selectinMegakaryocytes, platelets,PSGL-1Myeloid cells and lymphoid subsetsendotheliumIntegrinsLFA-1 (␣L ␤2)LeukocytesICAM-1, ICAM-2Endothelium and other cell types(constitutive and inducible)Mac-1 (␣M ␤2)Monocytes, granulocytesICAM-1, C3b, fibrinogen, factor XEndothelium and other cell typesp150,95 (␣X␤2)Monocytes, granulocytesC3b, fibrinogenEndotheliumVLA-4 (␣4␤1)Lymphocytes, monocytes,VCAM-1, fibronectinEndothelium, macrophages, dendriticbasophils, and eosinophilscells (constitutive and inducible)LPAM-1 (␣4␤7)Lymphocytes includingMAdCAM-1Mucosal endotheliumactivated T lymphocytesMAdCAM-1Endothelium␣V␤3LeukocytesPECAM-1, vitronectinEndotheliumIg superfamilyPECAM-1LeukocytesPECAM-1EndotheliumCAMs, cell adhesion molecules.

Table 4 .4Cultured human myoblasts express (constitutively or after cytokine induction) some molecules involved in antigen presentation and perpetuation of immune response.*PropertiesConstitutive expressionExpression after cytokine or chemokine stimulationAntigen processing and presentation  †MHC moleculesMHC class I(ϩ)ϩ (IFN-␥, TNF-␣, IL-␣, IL-1␤, MIP-1␣, MCP-1) Ϫ(TGF-␤)MHC class IIϪϩ (IFN-␥)Adhesion moleculesICAM-1Ϫϩ (IFN-␥, TNF-␣, IL-␣, IL1-␤)Costimulatory moleculesCD40ϩϩCD80 (B7.1), CD86 (B7.2)

Table 5 .5Cytokine expression in inflammatory myopathies.InflammatoryCell types in inflammatory myopathiesCytokinesmyopathies subtypesMononuclear cellsEndothelial cellsMuscle fibersECMReference no.Pro-inflammatory cytokinesIL-1␣AllϩϩϩϪ2,30,88,98,120IL-1␤AllϩϪϩϪ141TNF-␣Allϩ (PI, PM)ϩ (DM)ϩ (Reg)Ϫ2,30,85,88,98IL-6AllϩϪϩ (Reg)Ϫ2,28T H1 cytokinesIL-2AllϩϪϩϩ2,28,141INF-␥AllϩϪϩϩ2,28,141T H2 cytokinesIL-4All (DM)*ϩϪϪϪ2,28,141IL-10AllϩϪϪϪ2,141IL-13-ϪϪ141TGF-␤All (DM)ϩϩϪϩ29ECM, extracellular matrix; PI, partial invasion; Reg, regenerative fibers.*Conflicting results, observed in DM only.

Table 6 .6CAM expression in inflammatory myopathies.InflammatoryCell types in inflammatory myopathiesmyopathyMononuclearEndothelialNormalMoleculessubtypescellscellsMuscle fibersmusclesReference no.Selectins and ligandsEAll typesϪϩϪϪ73,39,92PP M Ͼ DMϪϩϪϩ /Ϫ (few EC)73SLeXAll typesϩ (except PI)ϩϩϩ /Ϫ73IntegrinsVLA-4 (␣4␤1)All typesϩϪϪϪ28,140LFA-1 (␣L␤2)All typesϩϪϪϪ28,39,140Ig superfamilyVCAM-1All typesϩ (DM)ϩϩ (regenerating perifascularϪ28,39,92,140fibers)ICAM-1All typesϩ (PI)ϩ (DM 1)ϩPIϩ (EC)14,28,39,92,140EC, endothelial cells; PI, partial invasion.

10974598, 2003, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mus.10462 by University Of Illinois At Urbana Champaign, Wiley Online Library on [06/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Table 7 .7Chemokines and chemokine receptors expression in inflammatory myopathies.InflammatoryNormalChemokines and receptorsExpression IMSubtypecellsVesselsECMmuscleReference no.␤-ChemokinesCCL2 (MCP-1)1DM Ͼ IBM -PMϩ (PI)ϩϩ (EC)ϩϩϪ28,30,38,91PM, IBM Ͼ DMCCR2CCR2A1Allϩ (PI)ϩϩϪϩ15CCR2B--Ϫ(SMC)ϪϩCCL3 (MIP-I␣)1Allϩϩ (EC)ϩϩϪ2,30CCL4 (MIP-I␤)1PM Ͼ PMϪNRNRϪ2CCL5 (RANTES)1PM Ͼ DMϪϪϪϪ2CCL7 (MCP-3)-ϪϪϪϪ38CCL17 (TARC)-ϪϪϪϪ38␣-ChemokinesCXCL8 (IL-8)-ϪϪϪϪ38EC, endothelial cells; NR, not recorded; SMC, smooth muscle cells.

