A novel homozygous missense mutation in the GNE gene of a patient with quadriceps-sparing hereditary inclusion body myopathy associated with muscle inflammation

An adult-onset hereditary inclusion body myopathy with sparing of the quadriceps muscle was originally described in Iranian Jews and assigned to a locus on chromosome 9p12-p13. Recently, mutations of the UDP-N-acetylglucosamine-2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase (GNE) gene were reported to cause hereditary inclusion body myopathy and one type of distal myopathy in a world-wide distribution. Importantly, the lack of muscle inflammation was used to distinguish hereditary inclusion body myopathy from the sporadic form of inclusion body myopathy. We report a case of a quadriceps-sparing myopathy in a non-Jewish, Iranian patient with a high degree of muscle inflammation. A novel homozygous G-to-A mutation (128933G ! A) in exon 7 changing a valine to isoleucine (V367I) in the epimerase domain of the GNE gene was found. We conclude that muscle inflammation is not sufficient to exclude the diagnosis of hereditary inclusion body myopathy.

Introduction

The morphological hallmarks of inclusion body myopathies (IBM) are muscle fibers that contain rimmed vacuoles and characteristic inclusion bodies [1]. Inclusion bodies contain a variety of proteins such as amyloid and the prion protein. Ultrastructurally, typical 15-18 nm filaments are found [2,3]. Clinically, most IBM patients present as sporadic cases at a higher age (sIBM) and show inflammatory muscle infiltrations similar to polymyositis [4]. Although the degree of inflammation is variable, sIBM might possibly involve an autoimmune mechanism. In contrast to sIBM, muscle biopsies of hereditary IBM (hIBM) patients usually lack inflammatory infiltrates. A quadriceps-sparing type of hIBM (QS-hIBM) was first described in 1984 among Iranian Jews [5]. QS-hIBM (OMIM 603824) is a slowly progressive disorder with onset in the third decade of life. Muscle weakness and atrophy develops in distal and proximal muscles of upper and lower limbs with exception of the quadriceps muscle. The quadriceps shows good preservation of strength until late stages of the disease although biopsies and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may demonstrate subclinical involvement [9]. Recently, recessive mutations in the UDP-N-acetylglucosamine-2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase (GNE) gene on chromosome 9p12 -p13 were shown to cause QS-hIBM [6 -8]. In addition, GNE mutations were identified in patients with hIBM and distal myopathies world-wide [9 -14].

Case report

The patient is now 34 years old and was followed in our department over the last 6 years. He is the first of two children to consanguineous parents of Iranian, non-Jewish origin. Both parents and his sister are clinically unaffected.

The patient developed first signs of muscle weakness at age 24 years. Muscle weakness of proximal leg muscles and bilateral foot drop resulted in gait difficulties. At the age of 28 involvement of the upper limbs was detected with asymmetric scapular winging and mild weakness of finger flexors. Oral steroid treatment did not show positive effects, while intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) appeared to slow down disease progression. At age 34, there is severe weakness and atrophy of proximal and distal lower limb muscles. However, 10 years after onset the quadriceps muscle is clinically preserved (MRC grade 5) lacking signs of atrophy. The patient shows the characteristic gait of quadriceps-sparing myopathy; he compensates the foot drop by forced use of the strong quadriceps.

Creatine kinase level was elevated between 370 and 650 U/l (normal: max. 80 U/l). Needle electromyography showed sharp waves and fibrillations at rest in m. tibialis anterior, m. gastrocnemius lateralis, m. biceps brachii and m. interosseus dorsalis I; no spontaneous activity was detected in m. rectus femoris and m. triceps brachii. At voluntary effort, mainly myopathic changes were recorded for m. gastrocnemius lateralis and m. biceps brachii; a mixed pattern of myopathic and neuropathic changes was recorded for m. tibialis anterior and m. interosseus dorsalis I; only a slight increase in polyphasic potentials was seen in m. rectus femoris and m. triceps brachii. At age 30, MRI of proximal (Fig. 1) and distal limb muscles (data not shown) revealed muscle edema and gadolinium-uptake strongly suggestive of inflammation. In addition, fatty muscle replacement was seen, while the quadriceps appeared relatively preserved. A muscle biopsy of the gastrocnemius muscle was carried out at age 30. On light microscopy, an inflammatory myopathy with rimmed vacuoles was detected (Fig. 2). Electron microscopy revealed characteristic cytoplasmic filamenteous inclusions (data not shown) in vacuolated muscle fibers establishing the diagnosis of inclusion body myositis. Immunofluorescence staining on muscle sections was carried out as follows: Monoclonal mouse anti-human CD3 (1/20; DAKO, Glostrup, Denmark) and monoclonal mouse anti-human HLA-ABC (1/15; DAKO) were used as primary antibodies and detected by sheep anti-mouse Cy3 (1/200; Sigma, Taufkirchen, Germany). Nuclei were visualized using bisbenzimide H 33258 (40 mg/ml; Sigma). Inflammatory infiltrates were detected in the endomysium and within necrotic fibers. Occasionally, invasion of non-necrotic muscle fibers by mononuclear cells was also observed. Most of the inflammatory cells stained positive for CD3. MHC-class-I expression was detected in the majority of inflammatory cells. Moreover, a circular staining of multiple non-necrotic muscle fibers was observed. MHC-class-I upregulation in non-necrotic muscle fibers is considered to be a strong indication of an inflammatory myopathy such as polymyositis (Fig. 2A -F). Therefore, the patient was diagnosed to suffer from sIBM. However, the young age of the patient and the clinical sign of quadriceps-sparing prompted us to analyse the GNE gene when it was first described in hIBM.

Genomic DNA was isolated from whole blood of the patient and his parents. Coding exons 2-12 of the GNE gene and flanking sequences (GenBank accession no. AL158830) were amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) as described [8] and analyzed by direct sequencing of the PCR products. A novel homozygous G-to-A transition (128933G ! A) was found in exon 7 changing a valin to isoleucin (V367I) in the epimerase domain of GNE. No additional GNE mutation was detected, in particular not the M712T mutation previously described in Iranian Jews. To confirm the GNE (128933G ! A) mutation, a 146 bp fragment of exon 7 (nucleotide 129 053-128 908) was amplified using the following primer set: nucleotide (nt) 129 033 -129 053 (sense) 5 0 -TGAAGTCTCAGTTTC-CATTAC-3 0 and nt 128 908-129 932 (antisense) 5 0 -TTGA-GAAACTTCAAAATCCTTGGTA-3 0 . A mismatch nucleotide is italicized. The antisense primer introduces a point mutation at nt 128 909 thereby creating a new Rsa I site only if the mutation is present; the wild-type sequence remains uncut. The PCR product was digested with 30 U of Rsa I and subjected to agarose gel electrophoresis. The patient carries the mutation homozygously, while his parents and sister are heterozygous which is compatible with recessive inheritance of the mutation (Fig. 3). Neither  50 unaffected European control individuals nor 51 unaffected Iranian controls from different regions of Iran were found to be carriers of this mutation.

Discussion

Muscle inflammation is considered characteristic to sIBM, but was thought to exclude hIBM [3]. Our report presents a case with clinical signs of hIBM, i.e. quadricepssparing and early onset, but evidence of muscle inflammation on MRI and muscle biopsy, suggestive of sIBM. In addition, we detected a novel homozygous GNE-mutation (V367I) likely to cause hIBM in our patient.

The GNE-mutation (V367I) is probably pathogenic for the following reasons: (i) the mutation was not detected in more than 200 European and Iranian control chromosomes; (ii) the mutation cosegregates in a recessive trait in the patient's family; (iii) the mutation affects a phylogenetically conserved residue within the GNE protein. However, direct experimental evidence for the pathogenicity of the mutation was not obtained. GNE is the key enzyme for the first enzymatic steps in neuraminic acid biosynthesis essential for sialidation of N-linked glycoproteins [7,8]. Missense mutations in the GNE gene may be associated with lower or absent epimerase activity in peripheral lymphocytes [12]. So far, a founder mutation in the GNE gene has been detected in Iranian Jews with hIBM, and other mutations in patients of non-Jewish descent [8,9,13]. Further mutations were discovered in Japanese patients presenting with distal myopathy with rimmed vacuoles [11,12,14].

To our knowledge this is the first reported case of hIBM combined with muscle inflammation. The reasons for the muscle inflammation associated with this mutation remain elusive at the moment. One might speculate that V367I 'renders' GNE immunogenic or that V367I directly or indirectly acts as a cell stressor, subsequently leading to aB-crystallin induction or disposal of other immunogenic epitopes [15]. However, inflammation was also observed in other hereditary myopathies such as dysferlinopathies and facio-scapulo-humeral muscular dystrophy [16,17]. Accordingly, the finding of inflammation in our hIBM patient might not be related to a specific gene or mutation, but rather be linked to a so far elusive pathomechanism.

We conclude that muscle inflammation is not sufficient to exclude the diagnosis of hIBM. However, GNE mutations are not frequent in sIBM. We did not detect GNE mutations in 12 German sIBM patients with disease onset prior to age 50, but without the typical clinical sign of quadricepssparing (data not shown). Similary, Vasconcelos et al. [9] recently reported GNE mutations in an American family with quadriceps-sparing IBM, and the lack of GNE mutations in 11 cases of 'classical' sIBM.

Acknowledgements

We thank the patient and his family for their kind participation in this study. We are grateful to Sybille Galuschka and Eva Wiens for expert technical assistance and Dr. G. Leinsinger for MRI analysis. S.K. receives a scholarship from The Myositis Association (Harrisonburg, VA, USA). W.M.F. and D.P. received support from Grifols Deutschland GmbH (Langen, Germany) and Aventis-Behring GmbH (Marburg, Germany). This work was supported in part by grants from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (Wi 1722/2-1, to H.W., Lo 549/2-3 to H.L.).

Fig. 1 .1Fig. 1. T1-weighted MRI scans of the thighs. (A) Symmetrical fatty replacement of the hamstrings. The quadriceps muscle is preserved. (B)Gadolinium uptake in the vastus medialis muscle reveals subclinical involvement of the quadriceps. In addition, circular gadolinium uptake in the left hamstrings is noted.

Fig. 2 .2Fig. 2. Histological and immunohistochemical analysis of transverse muscle cryosections. Panels C and E are serial sections; panel D shows a detail of panel C, panel F shows a detail of panel E. (A) Standard histology (6 mm section; hematoxylin -eosin; £100Þ shows an inflammatory myopathy. Note the strong infiltration of the endomysium by mononuclear cells. Most of these cells are CD3-positive, some invade non-necrotic muscle fibers (see panels E,F). (B) Standard histology (10 mm section; hematoxylin -eosin; £250Þ shows muscle fibers with rimmed vacuoles (rimmed vacuole indicated by an arrow). (C) MHCclass-I expression is demonstrated on inflammatory infiltrates and on the surface of muscle fibers (8 mm section; £100; MHC-class-I is visualized in red). Approximately 50% of the non-necrotic muscle fibers reveal a positive staining of the entire plasma membrane (indicated by arrows) indicating MHC-class-I upregulation (magnified in panel D). Inflammatory cells also stain positively for MHC class I (indicated with an asterisk). (D) Circular MHC-class-I staining (indicated by arrows) of non-necrotic muscle fibers (8 mm section; £250; MHC-class-I is visualized in red, nuclei in blue). Inflammatory cells also stain positively for MHC class I (indicated with an asterisk). (E) Immunostaining reveals numerous CD3-positive T-cells that are located in the endomysium surrounding non-necrotic fibers and within necrotic fibers (8 mm section; £100; CD3 is visualized in red). Occasionally, CD3-positive cells invade non-necrotic muscle fibers (indicated by an arrow; magnified in panel F). (F) CD3-positive cell invading a non-necrotic muscle fiber indicated by an arrow (8 mm section; £250; CD3 is visualized in red, nuclei are blue).

