Coexistence of X-linked recessive Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy with inclusion body myositis-like morphology

We reported three cases (two familial and one sporadic) of X-linked Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD), genetically documented. Two patients demonstrated a typical inclusion body myositis (IBM)-like morphology. The third patient had only minor changes. Patients had elbow and ankle contractures, progressive wasting of humeroperoneal muscles and cardiac failure (pacemaker implantation in all). There was a mutation within the Xq28 gene and complete absence of emerin in the nuclear membrane. Mononuclear cell infiltrations, rimmed vacuoles, amyloid deposits, as well as cytoplasmic and nuclear tubulofilamentous muscle inclusions were most unusual findings. Coexistence of IBM-like morphology and X-linked recessive EDMD might indicate that pathological features of IBM are nonspecific and may be present in other neuromuscular disorders.

Introduction

Up to 1999, Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy was thought to demonstrate X-linked recessive inheritance (X-EDMD). However, then an autosomal dominant form (AD-EDMD) was reported [5]. The disorder is characterized by early joint contractures, mainly of the elbows and ankles, limitation of cervical and thoracic spine flexion, slowly progressive muscle weakness and cardiomyopathy, usually present under the form of a heart block [12]. The defective gene responsible for the X-linked form has been identi-fied [4], and localized on the long arm of chromosome-X (Xq28).

The product of the X-EDMD gene, a serine-rich protein named emerin, contains a 20-amino acid hydrophobic domain at the C terminus [4]. Absence or protein deficiency in the nuclear membrane of skeletal, cardiac and smooth muscles [21,25], skin, blood cells [22,24] and oral exfoliative cells [30] are specific for X-EDMD.

The muscle morphology in X-EDMD is not pathognomic, demonstrating nonspecific myopathy changes. Endomysial connective tissue proliferation, fiber splitting, predominance of type 2 fibers and atrophy of type 1 fibers have been described [10,18,19,29].

Recently, we observed tubulofilamentous inclusions in the muscles of two patients diagnosed by genomic DNA analysis as X-EDMD. One of these cases was familial. We present morphological evidence of the similarity of these cases to inclusion body myositis (IBM).

Patients and methods

Familial cases

Case III/4

Figure 1 presents the pedigree of the family. Case III/4, the propositus of this study, was a male born in 1961, who progressively developed contractures of the neck, as well as of the ankles and elbows since early childhood. Difficulty in walking was noticed at the age of 3. At the age of 7 and 17 surgical elongations of the Achilles tendons were performed. Muscle weakness (proximal in upper and proximal and distal in lower extremities) became evident at the age of 25 years.

He was examined at the Department of Neurology, in Warsaw for the first time at the age of 27 years. The examination revealed winging scapulae, scoliosis and pronounced lumbar lordosis. Limited neck flexion, and elbow extension, as well as bilateral ankle contractures were present. Muscles were generally thin and weak. No hypertrophy of the calves was noted, all tendon reflexes were absent. The patient had walking difficulties due to ankle contractures. Laboratory findings showed that creatine kinase (CK) was slightly elevated (47 IU; normal up to 34 IU), aldolase 21 IU. Concentric needle EMG recorded from brachial biceps, triceps, and rectus femoris muscles revealed myopathy changes. Electrocardiographic Holter monitoring demonstrated low ventricular rate and

Case III/8

Case III/8, a male born in 1973, was admitted to the Department of Neurology, Warsaw in 1995 due to progressive muscle weakness and elbow contractures, beginning at the age of 17 years. His motor development until the age of 17 years was normal.

Physical examination at the age of 23 years revealed asthenic stature, winging scapulae, bilateral elbow and ankle contractures. Slight muscle weakness, proximal in the upper and distal in the lower extremities was noted. Tendon reflexes in the upper limbs were reduced, but were normal in the legs. Laboratory findings showed that CK was slightly elevated, (123 IU), as was the aldolase level (31.5 IU).

EMG recorded from biceps brachii and rectus femoris muscles revealed myopathy changes. Electrocardiographic Holter monitoring demonstrated low ventricular rate and high degree of atrioventricular block. A cardiac pacemaker was implanted at the age of 23 years. Mutation G421A in exon 2 of emerin gene was identified.

Cases III/7 and IV/1

Case III/7 was the sister of the propositus, and was examined at the age of 31 years. She was asymptomatic. Case IV/1 was a 7-yearold boy. During the first examination at the age of 5 years, he was symptom free. At the age of 7 years, mild contractures of the neck and elbow were observed.

Sporadic case

Male born in 1954 was investigated at the age of 41 years. From childhood on, he developed progressive muscle weakness, and an-kle and elbow contractures, followed by neck contractures. At the age of 14 years, surgical elongation of Achilles tendons was performed. At the age of 20, symptoms of heart failure appeared, ECG demonstrated sinus bradycardia, low junctional escape rhythm at a rate of 38/min and incomplete atrioventricular block. The patient required peacemaker implantation. During follow-up slow deterioration in muscle strength was noted.

Physical examination at the age of 40 years revealed a tall, thin man with an abnormal neck posture and limited neck flexion. He had a narrow long face, generalized muscle weakness (mainly of shoulder girdle and peroneal muscles) and elbow contractures. All tendon reflexes were absent.

Routine laboratory findings were normal except for a slightly elevated CK level. EMG examination of biceps brachii and rectus femoris muscles showed a myopathic pattern. Mutation C636T in exon 3 of the emerin gene was identified.

Methods

We investigated the two family male subjects affected by X-EDMD, and the sporadic case. Diagnosis was based upon clinical data, DNA analysis and immunohistochemical examinations [14].

Rectus femoris muscles in familial cases and pectoralis muscle in the sporadic case were examined by light and electron microscopy. For light microscopy, serial frozen sections were stained according to standard techniques. For indirect immunofluorescence examinations, 8-µm cryostat sections were stained using monoclonal anti-emerin, and anti β-amyloid antibodies (Novocastra), and anti-CD4 and anti-CD8 lymphocytes (Behring). In brief, antibodies diluted 1:50 were applied to tissue sections for 60 min. Sections were rinsed with PBS and incubated for a further 30 min with the appropriate TRITC-conjugated secondary antibody (diluted 1:30 with PBS). After washing with PBS, the sections were mounted in gel-mount and view with an Opton-Zeiss standard LAB16 microscope equipped with epifluorescence optics. For electron microscopy, muscle specimens were fixed in glutaraldehyde in phosphate Fig. 1 The pedigree of the family buffer and postfixed in a solution of 1% osmium tetroxide of the same buffer. They were dehydrated and embedded in spurr-resin. Semithin sections were stained with methylene blue for light microscopy. Thin sections, double-stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate were examined with a JEM 1200 X electron microscope.

Results

Muscle biopsy specimens of case III/4 and the sporadic case demonstrated similar myopathic patterns. There was an increased variability in the size of fibers, normal or hypertrophic mixed with small ones, including atrophic, angulated fibers (Fig. 2a, c). Hypertrophied muscle fibers showed splitting. A few necrotic fibers undergoing phagocytosis were observed in both cases. A moderate increase in endo-and perimysial connective tissue, more marked in the sporadic case, was observed. Small perivascular infiltrations surrounding blood vessels, as well as invasion of non-necrotic muscle fibers by CD8 lymphocytes were also noted (Fig. 3). The most striking finding in both cases was the presence of rimmed vacuoles (20% and 35% respectively), in atrophic, as well as normal muscle fibers, mainly in the center of the fiber or subsarcolemmally (Fig. 2a, b, d). On NADH diaphorase staining, type 1, 2A and 2B fibers were distributed in a mosaic pattern with a tendency towards fiber 1 grouping.

Immunostaining of muscle biopsies specimens demonstrated no labeling with emerin antibody in any of the three patients, while in control muscles intensive reactivity around each myonucleus was observed (Fig. 4a, b). In selected muscle fibers small β-amyloid depositions were found (Fig. 2c).

Ultrastructurally, vacuoles appeared as a collection of autophagic vacuoles filled with whorls of myelin-like figures, membrane fragments and cellular debris. In the vicinity of autophagic vacuoles, filamentous inclusions were frequently observed (Fig. 5a, b). Tubulofilamentous structures (TFs), 16-21 nm in diameter, were localized in the intrafibrillar, as well as subsarcolemmal space (Fig. 5b). At high magnification, TFs demonstrated distinct tubular profiles with an inner diameter of 4-6 nm and longitudinal periodicity of 5 nm. Similar TF collections were also visible within the nuclei (Fig. 6a, b).

In case III/8, morphological changes were less prominent than those observed in the muscles of the older brother. The quadriceps muscle revealed marked variation in fiber size, varying between several and 200 µm in diameter. Split fibers and mildly increased connective tissue were also observed. A few muscle fibers underwent necrosis with phagocytosis. Perivascular infiltration surround-ing blood vessels was also observed. No rimmed vacuoles were found. No specific changes were observed under electron microscopy. In selected muscle fibers, membranous whorls were noted, although no TFs were observed in either the sarcoplasm or nuclei.

Discussion

In the presented cases, clinical, molecular and immunohistochemical analysis confirmed the diagnosis of X-EDMD. Morphological changes observed in these cases demonstrated a typical myopathic pattern. However, in one familial and one sporadic case rimmed vacuoles were noted. Additionally, small lymphocytic infiltrations, eosinophilic inclusions and intracellular amyloid in some muscle fibers were found.

Electron microscopic examinations revealed the presence of TFs, 18-21 nm in diameter, both in the intrafibrillar space and nuclei. Structural alterations such as rimmed vacuoles, TFs within the sarcoplasm and nuclei are considered to be an important clue towards IBM diagnosis.

It is intriguing that in the younger brother (case III/8), TFs were not observed. Nevertheless, during EM examinations, myelin whorls were noted; these are frequently found in IBM and have not been previously described in EDMD. It is possible that these structures may precede TF formation.

IBM is a chronic neuromuscular disorder characterized by a combination of inflammatory infiltrates and myopathic changes with onset usually after the age of 50 years. Whereas EDMD is a X-linked inherited myopathy with cardiac and axial muscle involvement, elbow contractures and childhood onset, IBM is an acquired late inflammatory myopathy with proximal-distal muscles affected. There are also obvious muscle morphological differences between the two conditions. While in the muscles of EDMD patients, nonspecific dystrophic changes of variable severity with lack of emerin, have been observed as the main marker, IBM has morphological markers such as rimmed vacuoles within muscle fibers and a collection of intrasarcoplasmic and intranuclear TF inclusions, 18-22 nm in diameter. Recently, immunohistochemical studies, mainly by Askanas and co-workers [2], have demonstrated that vacuolated muscle fibers in cases of IBM express numerous amyloidassociated proteins. The accumulation of the β-amyloid precursor protein and microtubule-associated protein tau have been shown [3]. Since the same proteins accumulate in the brain of Alzheimer patients as in the muscles of IBM cases, a pathogenic analogy has been proposed [3]. Although abnormal muscle fibers with rimmed vacuoles containing cytoplasmic and nuclear TFs are a diagnostic IBM marker, there have been an increasing number of observations of the co-expression of IBM with another, usually autoimmune, disorder, e.g., with Sjögren's syndrome [17] and scleroderma [31]. It is more difficult to explain cases of other neuromuscular disorders with rimmed vacuoles and TFs. Indeed, the incidence of rimmed vacuoles and cytoplasmic and nuclear TFs inclusions have been reported in case of rigid spine syndrome [20], post-polio [1,6], spinal muscular atrophy [16], distal muscular dystrophy [27], myotonic dystrophy [11], familial encephalomyopathy [9], and familial desmin storage syndromes [15]. Pellissier et al. [28] attempted to characterize neuromuscular disorders expressing IBM-like morphology, both genetically transmitted and acquired. Apart from above-mentioned diseases or syndromes, they pondered over selected distal hereditary myopathies, recessively or dominantly transmitted [7,8,13,23,26,32], stressing that the morphological diagnosis of IBM was very difficult and not well defined, as compared to other inflammatory myopathies. Main difficulties for morphologists, according to the authors, was the fact that well-defined nosological entities exist that share some of the pathological hallmarks of IBM.

The presence of a classic morphological IBM picture, such as mononuclear infiltrations, rimmed vacuoles, amyloid deposits, and cytoplasmic and nuclear TFs inclusions in X-EDMD patients seems to be unique, and thus far, has not been previously reported. This finding indicates that the morphology of IBM is nonspecific and may be found in other neuromuscular disorders. 

Acknowledgement

The study was supported by the grant of the State Committee on Research: No 4P05B 061 18.

Fig. 2 aFig. 3 a23Fig. 2 a Muscle biopsy specimen demonstrates variation in fiber size and presence of a rimmed vacuole with granular material during HE staining. b Red granules in Trichrom stain. c Amyloid-positive material intensified by rhodamine. d Rimmed vacuole seen in atrophic muscle NADH (HE hematoxylin and eosin). Original magnification a-c ×448, d ×560

200Fig. 44Fig. 4 Immunohistochemical analysis. a Emerin-positive nuclei in control muscle. b Emerin-negative nuclei in affected muscle. Original magnification a, b ×1,050

201Fig. 5 a5Fig. 5 a Rimmed vacuoles containing membrane whorls. Note a small sarcoplasmic inclusion (arrow). b Higher magnification of sarcoplasmic inclusions. Original magnification a ×4,000, b ×40,000

Fig. 6 a6Fig. 6 a Tubulofilamentous structures in the nucleus. b Higher magnification of tubulofilamentous structures in the nucleus. Original magnification a ×24,000, b ×105,000

