Overexpression of semicarbazide-sensitive amine oxidase in human myopathies

Oxidative stress has been implicated in the pathogenesis of several muscle diseases. Semicarbazide-sensitive amine oxidase (SSAO) metabolizes oxidative deamination of primary aromatic and aliphatic amines. In the oxidative reactions, amine substrates are converted into the aldehyde, followed by the production of ammonia and H 2 O 2 . Although normal levels in muscle are very low, SSAO is expressed in almost all mammalian tissues. In this study, we examined the possible implication of SSAO as an additional source of oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of muscle disorders. The expression of SSAO was examined immunohistochemically in muscle biopsy specimens from patients with inclusion-body myositis (IBM; n ϭ 5), desmin-related myopathy (DRM; n ϭ 3), dermatomyositis (n ϭ 3), granulomatous (sarcoid) myopathy (n ϭ 2), muscle denervation-reinnervation (n ϭ 3), and rhabdomyolysis (n ϭ 2), as well as from control subjects (n ϭ 3). Strong SSAO immunoreactivity was present in vacuolated and nonvacuolated fibers in IBM, in abnormal fibers in DRM, and in degenerating and regenerating fibers in dermatomyositis and rhabdomyolysis. In addition, SSAO overexpression was observed in muscle fibers adjacent to granulomas in sarcoid myopathy. These results suggest that SSAO is a source of oxidative stress in diseased human skeletal muscle and that it contributes to oxidative stress-induced damage in various inflammatory and other myopathies. Alternatively, the expression of SSAO in muscle fibers may be a consequence of muscle fiber injury.

Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are forms of oxygen resulting from reduction of the oxygen molecule during normal aerobic metabolism. In muscle cells, most ROS result from mitochondrial electron transport. Enzymatic reactions including NADPH-like oxidases, xanthine oxidases, and cyclo-oxygenase constitute other sources of ROS. 21,27 Superoxide anion, hydroxyl radical, and hydrogen peroxide are wellknown examples of ROS. 6,27 Amine oxidases metabolize monoamines, diamines, and polyamines of en-dogenous or exogenous origin. The Cu-dependent amine oxidases [E.C. 1.4.3.5.], sensitive to carbonyl reagents such as semicarbazide, comprise diamine oxidase and semicarbazide-sensitive amine oxidase (SSAO), which deaminates both aromatic and aliphatic primary amines. In the catalytic reactions, oxygen is consumed, rendering ammonia, aldehydes, and hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ) as final products. 15 Present in blood plasma, SSAO is also widely associated with membranes in many mammalian tissues. 1,13,14 Yet SSAO is expressed at very low levels in human skeletal muscles. 1 It has been suggested that SSAO may play a role as a scavenger of circulating toxic amines and participate in the regulation of physiological processes via H 2 O 2 generation. 1,10 At this time, SSAO is considered to be a multifunctional protein, depending on the tissue in which it is expressed, and its physiological function is not clear. In adipocytes, SSAO mimics the effect of insulin, 10 whereas SSAO has a sequence identity with a vascular-adhesion protein (VAP-1) at the c-DNA level. 23 An endothelial glycoprotein, VAP-1 is induced by inflammation and supports the adhesion of lymphocytes to endothelial cells and mediates lymphocyte recirculation in an l-selectine-dependent manner. Therefore, an increment in the expression of SSAO in a particular tissue can be considered an indicator of oxidative stress. 29,30 Several studies suggested that free radical toxicity participates in the pathogenesis of several muscle diseases, including inclusion-body myositis (IBM), mitochondrial myopathies, distal myopathies with rimmed vacuoles, muscular dystrophies, and inflammatory myopathies. 2-4,6,11,12,20,24 -26,28 Nitric oxide (NO) is an intracellular and intercellular messenger formed by nitric oxide synthase (NOS). There are three forms of NOS: a constitutive form, an inducible form abundant in macrophages (iNOS), and a neuronal form (nNOS). The direct toxicity of NO is modest but is greatly enhanced by reaction with superoxide to form peroxinitrite. 5 Superoxide dismutases (SOD), which include SOD1 (cytosolic, Cu/Zn-dependent), SOD2 (mitochondrial, Mn-dependent), and SOD3 (extracellular, Cu/Zn-dependent), are major antioxidant proteins protecting cells from oxidative stress by converting superoxide anion to hydrogen peroxide and oxygen and by attenuating NOS. 17 The rationale of the current study is based on the assumption that deamination is enhanced in myopathies with abnormal protein deposits, as well as in inflammatory and necrotizing myopathies, and that SSAO may play a role in the process, thus resulting in an additional source of oxidative stress in certain muscle diseases. For this reason, the current study analyzes by immunohistochemistry the expression of SSAO in muscle biopsies from patients suffering from IBM, desmin-related myopathy (DRM), rhabdomyolysis, and inflammatory myopathies. In IBM, vacuolated fibers contain amyloid-␤ precursor protein, amyloid-␤, phosphorylated tau in the form of paired helical filaments, presenilin-1, and other proteins normally found in the brain in Alzheimer's disease. 2,3 In DRM, 7 in addition to the characteristic intracytoplasmic desmin aggregates, an overexpression of ␤-amyloid protein, ␤-amyloid precursor protein, ubiquitin, ␣1-antichymotrypsin and several cyclin-dependent kinases are found in muscle biopsy specimens. 8,19 Furthermore, accumulation of phosphorylated tau has been demonstrated in muscle fibers in DRM (personal observation).

PATIENTS AND METHODS

Muscle biopsies were obtained for diagnostic purposes from 18 patients (11 men and seven women aged 50 to 77 years; mean age, 63.1 years). Diagnoses were as follows: IBM, 5; DRM, 3; dermatomyositis, 3; granulomatous myopathy due to sarcoidosis, 2; muscle denervation-reinnervation from chronic peripheral neuropathy, 3; and drug-induced necrotizing myopathy, 2.

Diagnoses were made on the basis of the clinical, laboratory, and electrophysiological data, together with the neuropathological findings upon histochemical, immunohistochemical, and electron microscopic examination of the muscle biopsies. Muscle biopsies from three age-matched patients who complained of myalgia (three men aged 59 to 70 years; mean age, 64.6 years) and were finally considered to be free of muscle disease after complete clinical, electrophysiological, and morphological examination were used as controls.

Part of the muscle sample was fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 24 h at 4°C and embedded in paraffin. Dewaxed transverse sections, 3 m thick, were processed for SSAO immunohistochemistry following the streptavidin-biotin-peroxidase method (LSAB, two system, HRP; Dako, Barcelona, Spain). Briefly, after blocking endogenous peroxidase with H 2 O 2 and methanol, the sections were boiled in 10 mM citrate buffer (pH 6.0) for 25 min and stored overnight in the same solution at room temperature. Sections were then incubated with 3% normal horse serum diluted 1:100 and incubated overnight at 4°C with the primary antibody diluted in 1% normal horse serum. Purified polyclonal antibody to SSAO from bovine lung was used at a dilution of 1:500. The characterization of the antibody was described previously. 16 The peroxidase reaction was visualized with 0.05% diaminobenzidine and 0.01% hydrogen peroxide. Consecutive sections in every case were routinely incubated with antirabbit immunoglobulin G (IgG) without the SSAO antibody to exclude nonspecific immunoreactions.

To characterize SSAO-immunoreactive fibers as regenerating or degenerating fibers, some sections were processed for double-labeling immunohistochemistry to SSAO and N-cell adhesion molecule (N-CAM) following a two-step protocol. The tissue sections where first incubated with the anti-SSAO antibody and the immunoreaction was visualized with 0.05% diaminobenzidine and 0.01% hydrogen peroxide. The sections were then incubated with the anti-N-CAM antibody (Novocastra, Barcelona, Spain) at a dilution of 1:100, and the immunoreac-tion was visualized with 0.01% benzidine dihydrochloride, 0.025% sodium nitroferricyanide in 0.01M sodium phosphate buffer (pH 6), and 0.005% hydrogen peroxide. The SSAO immunoreactivity was recognized by a brown precipitate, whereas N-CAM immunoreactivity was identified by a dark blue precipitate.

RESULTS

General Neuropathological Findings. Muscle biopsies from patients with IBM showed variation in the size of fibers, with small fibers forming small groups. In all cases, endomysial inflammatory infiltrates and vacuolated fibers containing intracytoplasmic inclusions were observed. Muscle fibers with mitochondrial abnormalities showing cytochrome c oxidase deficiency also were present. Muscle biopsy specimens from patients with DRM showed variation in fiber size and increased numbers of internal nuclei. Rimmed vacuoles were frequently seen. Several fibers contained intracytoplasmic inclusions, which appeared pink on hematoxylin and eosin stains, and blue-red on modified Gomori stains. The inclusions reacted strongly for desmin. In patients with dermatomyositis, muscle fiber necrosis, degeneration, and regeneration, perivascular inflammation and perifascicular atrophy were the main pathological abnormalities. Large areas of the muscle tissue were replaced by granulomas in the muscle biopsies from two patients with sarcoidosis, whereas the muscle fibers appeared relatively well preserved in areas not invaded by granulomas. Muscle fiber necrosis and regeneration were the major abnormalities observed in muscle biopsies from patients with rhabdomyolysis. Finally, variation in the size of fibers and fibertype grouping were observed in patients with muscle denervation and reinnervation. SSAO Immunohistochemistry. In control muscles, the expression of SSAO was restricted to the wall of intramuscular vessels. Semicarbazide-sensitive amine oxidase immunoreactivity was not present in the cytoplasm of muscle fibers in controls. Strong SSAO immunoreactivity was observed in the cytoplasm of muscle fibers in all pathological cases. In muscle biopsy specimens from IBM patients, 6 -8% of fibers showed strong SSAO immunoreactivity. Semicarbazide-sensitive amine oxidase immunoreactivity was observed in vacuolated fibers as well as in degenerating-regenerating fibers. In muscle biopsy specimens from DRM patients, about 3-4% of fibers were immunostained with the anti-SSAO antibody. In these cases, SSAO immunoreactivity was observed under the sarcolemma or diffusely in the cytoplasm of muscle fibers. Large numbers of fibers showing overexpression of SSAO were observed in muscle biopsy specimens from patients with dermatomyositis or rhabdomyolysis. The percentage of SSAO-positive fibers was 12-16% in patients with dermatomyositis and 20 -23% in patients with rhabdomyolysis. Finally, strong SSAO overexpression was detected in the cytoplasm of muscle fibers adjacent to granulomas in muscle specimens from patients with sarcoid myopathy (Fig. 1). In these cases, the percentage of SSAO-positive fibers was 4 -5%. Semicarbazide-sensitive amine oxidase immunoreactivity was not observed in specimens from patients with muscle fiber denervation and reinnervation.

Double-labeling immunohistochemistry using SSAO and N-CAM antibodies, the latter used as a marker of regeneration, disclosed N-CAM colocalization in about 20% of SSAO-immunoreactive fibers (Fig. 2).

DISCUSSION

Previous studies implicated oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of various myopathies. 2-4,6,11,12,20,24 -26,28 Several studies were conducted in muscle biopsies from patients affected by sporadic and hereditary forms of IBM and other myopathies with rimmed vacuoles. [2][3][4]24,26,28 Although most of the studies did not demonstrate free radical injury to muscle cells directly, the observation of an increased oxidative stress response in muscle fibers suggests free radical production. Thus, overexpression of nitrotyrosine, nNOS, iNOS, SOD1, and SOD1-mRNA was found in vacuolated fibers of sporadic and hereditary forms of IBM. [2][3][4]28 Furthermore, increased expression of SOD2, an antioxidant protein, has been found associated with nitrotyrosine in myopathies with rimmed vacuoles. 26 Finally, using monoclonal antibodies against 8-hydroxy-2Ј-deoxyguanosine and 8-hydroxiguanosine, oxidative damage of DNA and RNA was recently documented in the same disorders. 24 The mechanisms that lead to the production of free radicals in these disorders are not well understood. It was suggested that the accumulation of ␤ amyloid precursor protein in IBM as well as in myopathies with rimmed vacuoles leads to increased generation of free radicals, culminating in oxidative stress. 2,28 We found that SSAO was overexpressed not only in IBM but also in DRM and other myopathies. Because, as in IBM and other myopathies with rimmed vacuoles, ␤ amyloid precursor protein accumulates in muscle fibers in DRM, 8 the same mechanism leading to free radical production in IBM could be operative in DRM. In addition, the current study has shown SSAO overexpression in inflammatory myopathies and in rhabdomyolysis, in which deposition of ␤ amyloid precursor protein does not occur. Other factors, such as mitochondrial respiratory chain dysfunction, were proposed as the source of reactive oxygen species in sporadic IBM but not in the familial form of the disease. 2,28 Mitochondrial abnormalities and respiratory chain dysfunction also were recently documented in DRM. 22 Whether this causes oxidative stress in the disorders has not been elucidated.

The results of the current study demonstrate accumulation of SSAO in selected fibers in IBM, DRM, inflammatory myopathies, and rhabdomyolysis. We do not know whether the expression of SSAO in muscle fibers in these conditions is accompanied by increased function of the enzyme. Overexpression of SSAO in skeletal muscles followed by increased function of the enzyme and subsequent catalytic activity may trigger the production of reactive oxygen species, resulting in oxidative damage to muscle fibers. Alternatively, the expression of SSAO in abnormal muscle fibers may be the result of muscle fiber injury.

Taken together, the current observations indicate that SSAO overexpression occurs in a wide range of myopathies. Whether this is followed by a production of ROS leading to oxidative injury in muscle fibers or is merely a nonspecific response of the damaged muscle fiber requires further investigation.

Recent observations also showed that SSAO substrates stimulate glucose transport, inhibit lipolysis, and stimulate tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrates 1 and 3 in adipocytes, 18,31 as well as regulating glucose uptake in cultured vascular smooth muscle cells. 9 Whether increased SSAO expression in degenerating and regenerating muscle fibers has implications in glucose transport in damaged fibers must be considered in further studies. 

The authors thank T. Yohannan for editorial advice. This work was supported by Fondo de Investigacio ´n Sanitaria grant 02-0005, Ministerio de Ciencia y Tecnologı ´a grant SAF2001-4681-E, and Centro de Investigacio ´n de Enfermedades Neurolo ´gicas network project.

FIGURE 1 .1FIGURE 1. Semicarbazide-sensitive amine oxidase immunocytochemistry. Diffuse cytoplasmic overexpression of SSAO in vacuolated muscle fibers in IBM (A and B) and in a nonvacuolated fiber in DRM (C). Increased SSAO immunoreactivity under the sarcolemma in DRM (D). Necrotic fibers in dermatomyositis showing SSAO overexpression (E and F). A muscle fiber near a granulomatous lesion showing increased SSAO expression in a patient with sarcoid myopathy (G). Strong SSAO immunoreactivity in necrotic fibers in rhabdomyolysis (H and I). Paraffin sections, slight hematoxylin counterstaining. (Bar, 50 m.)

FIGURE 2 .2FIGURE 2. Double-labeling immunohistochemistry to SSAO (brown precipitate) and N-CAM (dark blue precipitate) in dermatomyositis (A and B), and in drug-induced rhabdomyolysis (C-F). In some fibers, SSAO immunoreactivity colocalizes N-CAM (thick arrows), whereas others express only SSAO (small arrows) or N-CAM (thin arrows). Both degenerating and regenerating fibers express SSAO, although the majority of SSAOimmunoreactive fibers do not express N-CAM. Paraffin sections, slight hematoxylin counterstaining. (Bar in F, 50 m.)

