Adult inflammatory myopathies

The major inflammatory myopathies of adults-dermatomyositis, polymyositis and inclusion body myositis-are uncommon and can be difficult to distinguish from many conditions that mimic them clinically. They have a high morbidity; they are not infrequently the first sign of an associated malignancy; and they may be a part of another connective tissue disease. Their pathogenetic features suggest that they are different illnesses. Dermatomyositis and polymyositis are clearly inflammatory, both clinically and histologically, and both generally respond to therapy directed towards inflammation. Inclusion body myositis is now generally recognized as the most common myopathy presenting in patients over the age of 50 years, and it responds only modestly and sometimes not at all to immunosuppressive therapy. In this review, we have summarised the major newly recognized features of pathogenesis, the involvement of extramuscular organs, the differential diagnosis, diagnostic approaches and the main lines of therapy.

Adult inflammatory myopathy (myositis) includes the three most common diseasespolymyositis (PM), dermatomyositis (DM) and inclusion body myositis (IBM)-and a number of much rarer entities. For clinicians, the criteria proposed by Bohan and Peter remain the most familiar and accepted definitions of the first two of these immunemediated myopathies. 1,2 They combine clinical, laboratory and pathological features, and have been used in most clinical trials. IBM was not part of the original classification scheme but is now widely included. Additional useful classification criteria have been proposed by Tanimoto et al and by Targoff et al. 3,4 Although other classification criteria systems for IBM have been devised, the characteristic biopsy changes remain the defining feature. 5 Additional idiopathic inflammatory myopathies, which include giant cell myositis, eosinophilic myositis, focal/localized myositis, granulomatous myositis, macrophagic myofasciitis, pipestem capillary disease and myositis related to other connective tissue diseases, will not be explored further in this review.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The inflammatory myopathies are rare. The incidence rate of PM is estimated to be between 2.18 £ 10 26 and 7.7 £ 10 26 . Oddis and Medsger found an increasing incidence in two separate studies performed 20 years apart, although this may reflect better diagnostic accuracy rather than a true increase. 6,7 The incidence appears to increase with age, highest rates being seen in the 35-44 and 55 -64-year-old age groups. There is a paucity of epidemiological studies that address the incidence among non-white ethnic groups. Oddis et al 7 found a fourfold increase in incidence in black males compared with white males and a nearly threefold increase in black females compared with white females.

Overall, there is a female to male ratio of approximately 2:1 in PM and DM. IBM is more common in men, but IBM was not until recently always recognized or treated separately from PM, hence the epidemiological information on it is more limited, and its incidence and prevalence are not well known. Several groups that see a large number of patients with muscle disease have observed that IBM is probably the most common inflammatory myopathy in patients over about 50 years of age. Some argue that IBM should not be included among the inflammatory myopathies since inflammation is often sparse and hence may play only a secondary role 8 , and the response to antiinflammatory therapy is recognized as at best modest.

A recent study was undertaken to determine whether climactic and geographical factors influence the distribution of DM, PM and associated autoantibodies around the world. Of the variables evaluated in univariate and multivariate analyses, surface ultraviolet radiation intensity most strongly contributed to the relative proportion of DM and was strongly related to the proportion of anti-Mi-2 autoantibodies. 9 This study suggests that ultraviolet radiation may modulate the clinical and histopathological expression of autoimmune muscle disease in various populations.

An international collaborative effort to link those working on myositis, in order to standardize criteria, particularly for clinical trials, has been created. The leaders of this effort envision prospective multicentre interdisciplinary studies that incorporate clinical, laboratory and pathological information using standardized and validated measures and methods in future co-operative trials. 10 Such information should help to achieve improved diagnostic and classification criteria and facilitate co-operative studies of therapy.

PATHOGENESIS

The pathogenesis of the autoimmune inflammatory myopathies remains elusive and the mechanism of cell injury in inflammatory myopathy unclear. Although there are cases of myositis in which frank inflammation is missing on muscle biopsy, it is generally accepted that inflammation is the major cause of muscle damage and that autoimmunity lies at the root of the inflammation. Autoantibodies-albeit not directed at muscle specific antigens-are found in the majority of cases of PM and DM, but not commonly in IBM, and in many cases the antibodies are unique to myositis. It remains unclear, however, whether the autoantibodies play a pathogenetic role, whether or not the autoantibody responses are T-cell dependent and whether or not autoreactive T-cells exist. Many have observed that skeletal muscle fibres do not constitutively express major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class molecules, yet the muscle fibres of patients with myositis demonstrate high levels of MHC class I expression. The logical assumption is that the MHC-expressing muscle cells present important self antigens to the T-cells present in the inflamed muscle tissue, but this scenario is far from proven and other possibilities can be imagined. The ability of muscle cells to behave as professional antigen-presenting cells remains uncertain because of the lack of traditional costimulatory cells in muscle cells. 11 Great strides have, however, been made towards a better characterization of the mechanisms at play in these rare diseases. DM and PM have been distinguished by the presence or absence of a heliotrope eruption around the eyes or Gottron's rash on the knuckles, but it has increasingly been appreciated that the biopsy features, although overlapping, also have distinguishing features. 12 Some persuasive observations support a primary role for endomysial invasion by CD8 þ T-cells in PM, and a vasculopathy with a humoral immune basis in DM. Recent findings on the distribution of T-cell receptors in the pathological lesions are consistent with the idea that the role of cellular immunity is different in the two diseases. 13 Although it has been suggested that certain immunopathological features, which appear to reflect different pathological mechanisms, be used to develop a new classification scheme 14 , that effort is premature since it proposes using histological findings not generally available while ignoring other wellstudied features without offering evidence that the prognosis and response to therapy-the true concerns of patients and physicians-are better represented.

Although apoptosis has not been recognized histologically in myositis, it is thought that granzyme B and perforin have a role, especially in PM. 15,16 Casciola-Rosen and colleagues have determined that the development of some of the myositis-specific antibodies, as well as other autoantibodies, may involve the unique susceptibility of the targeted antigens to granzyme B cleavage. 17 The role of local cytokines has not been established, but apparently some of the autoantigenic targets in myositis-most notably Jo-1 itself-has chemoattractant (chemokine-like) properties and may therefore draw inflammatory cells to sites of muscle cell injury. 18 In earlier studies, careful searches for candidate viruses were negative, but several other viral aetiologies, including human immunodeficiency virus, human T-cell lymphotrophic virus, hepatitis C and parvovirus B-19, have been postulated although not proven in the aetiology of some cases of inflammatory myopathy. 19 Proposed pathogenic mechanisms for the development of IBM of both the familial and the sporadic forms include the concept of the increased transcription and accumulation of beta-amyloid precursor protein and its proteolytic fragments; abnormal accumulations of the components of lipid metabolism, including cholesterol; oxidative stress; and accumulations of Alzheimer's disease-related proteins. 20 These characteristics, in concert with the concept of misfolded or unfolded proteins in the context of a cellular ageing milieu, appear to contribute to the pathogenesis of IBM. Predisposing genetic factors such as the transthyretin Val122Ile mutation have also been proposed to contribute to the pathogenesis of IBM in select cases. 21 The most important step forward in the study of IBM in recent years has been the identification of mutations in the UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase gene in the recessive familial quadriceps-sparing IBM first described in Iranian Jews but now more widely recognized. 22 

DIAGNOSIS

The definitive diagnosis of an inflammatory requires a muscle biopsy. A biopsy should be performed on every patient in whom the diagnosis of an inflammatory myopathy is considered, in order not only to confirm the diagnosis, but also to rule out the many conditions that resemble myositis clinically. In addition to a careful history, family history and laboratory tests, both electromyography and imaging studies, particularly magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), may serve as useful adjuncts to diagnosis, and MRI can also be helpful in selecting a site for biopsy. In a small number of cases, muscle enzyme measurements are not elevated even on repeated testing, and it is worth recalling that the serum level of creatine kinase tends to be low in some patients with connective tissue diseases and high in some patients with hypothyroidism. Extreme elevations (more than 100-fold higher than the upper limit of normal) in creatine kinase are very rare in myositis and should signal the need for a careful search for another diagnosis.

Overall, biopsy is generally acknowledged to have a false-negative rate of 10 -25%. Some of this false negativity is the unavoidable consequence of the unevenness of distribution of the tissue pathology. Not only are some entire muscles neighbouring inflamed muscles often spared, but the inflammation is also not uniformly distributed within a muscle or even within a fascicle. Because MRI can reduce the false-negative rate, it may increase sensitivity and enhance the negative predictive value. 23,24 Occasionally, a muscle biopsy may not demonstrate a mononuclear cell infiltrate if therapy has been started, but other pathological changes may persist. Similarly, in some cases of subacute necrotizing myopathy, no inflammatory infiltrate may be present, but this should not delay therapy as this entity may be steroid responsive. 25 

Muscular manifestations

The clinical hallmark of PM and DM is the gradual onset over weeks to months of symmetrical proximal muscle weakness. Dermatomyositis has, in addition, characteristic dermatological findings, including a heliotrope rash, Gottron's sign and the shawl and V signs. Dermatologists have called attention to patients with rashes typical of myositis but unaccompanied by muscle disease. The appearance of diagnostic DM rashes is followed by myositis within 1 or 2 years in the majority of such cases. 26 IBM differs in its clinical presentation as its hallmark is usually atrophy and weakness of the quadriceps and the wrist and finger flexors, producing predominantly distal rather than proximal weakness. It has been noted that a history of frequent falls is common. In addition, facial weakness is an occasional IBM-associated feature seen only rarely in PM and DM.

Tables 1 and 2 outline features that may suggest or lead a way from a diagnosis of myositis.

Extramuscular manifestations

The inflammatory myopathies are systemic and often multi-organ illnesses. Extramuscular systems affected beside the skin include the heart (arrythmias, congestive heart failure and myocarditis), lung (fibrosing alveolitis, aspiration and, most notably, interstitial lung disease), gastrointestinal tract (dysphagia and in rare instances intestinal vasculitis) and joints (arthralgia and non-deforming symmetrical arthritis). As described below, autoantibody status may help to predict the extramuscular clinical phenotype.

Cardiac involvement

Clinically significant heart disease-heart failure as a result of myocarditis or significant cardiac arrhythmias-is very uncommon in myositis. There is a reported association between anti-signal recognition particle (SRP) antibodies and cardiac involvement, largely based on two studies in the past decade that included a total of 20 patients with SRP antibodies. 27,28 Of these subjects, only one was diagnosed with a true cardiomyopathy. Most patients had associated cardiac palpitations by report with no further investigative studies. More recent evidence suggests that anti-SRP antibodies may not contribute to cardiac involvement to the degree that was once suspected. 29 

Pulmonary involvement

Several recent reviews have shed new light on pulmonary disease. In a survey of 70 cases of clinical and radiographic evidence of pulmonary fibrosis or interstitial pneumonia gathered from 973 patients evaluated at the Mayo Clinic, surgical lung biopsies were carried out on 22. Of these, 18 had non-specific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP), of whom 11 had fibrosis. Two had diffuse alveolar damage, and one each had usual interstitial pneumonia and bronciolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia. 30 In a series of 156 patients in France, 36 demonstrated pulmonary involvement. A high morbidity and mortality, including five deaths, was notable. In this series, a substantial proportion of patients (19.2%) improved or even showed a resolution of their lung disease. 31 In a series from Japan, an unusually high incidence of interstitial lung disease was found; most patients had NSIP or usual interstitial pneumonia. Diffusion capacity and the findings on high-resolution computed tomography (CT) were especially sensitive in detecting this disease. Of special interest was the finding that an elevation in the serum level of KL-6, a pulmonary glycoprotein, acted as a marker of clinically active lung disease. 32 A recent retrospective review of the CT scan findings of 14 patients with NSIP associated with PM and DM over an average duration of follow-up of 27.6 months (range 3-61 months) concluded that, with treatment, serial CT scans of PM/DM patients with NSIP showed limited radiographic progression of the fibrosis and an improvement in ground-glass and/or reticular opacities. 33 Patients with anti-synthetase autoantibodies such as anti-Jo-1 are more likely to have interstitial lung disease. Even patients with amyopathic DM may develop potentially fatal interstitial lung disease. 34 

Differential diagnosis

There is a need to define the boundaries between treatment-resistant inflammatory myopathy and genetic dystrophies, among other clinical mimics. 8 In the clinic at the National Institutes of Health, USA, patients with the diseases shown in Table 3 have been referred by neurologists and rheumatologists for the management of myositis in the past decade.

Autoantibody-defined syndromes

Since the initial observation that interstitial lung disease is particularly frequent in patients with anti-Jo-1 autoantibodies 35 , it has been recognized that several autoantibodies are strongly associated with certain clinical features. 27 The most common is the so-called anti-synthetase syndrome (Jo-1 being the ubiquitous protein histidyl-tRNA synthetase, one of six aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases-a family of enzymes involved in protein synthesis-that may be the target of autoantibodies in DM or PM). In this, fever, Raynaud's phenomenon, arthritis, interstitial lung disease and a dry, cracking rash of the fingers termed mechanic's hands are associated with myositis. Patients with anti-Mi-2 autoantibodies often have DM with a rash of the upper chest and back (the shawl sign). Patients with anti-SRP often have a more severe illness, often of Table 3. Differential diagnosis: patients referred for the management of myositis. † Dystrophies-six kinds † Metabolic diseases-phosphofructokinase deficiency, acid maltase deficiency, phosphorylase B kinase deficiency † Mitochondrial disease † Neurological disease-motor neuron disease, Parkinson's disease, spinal muscular atrophy, myasthenia gravis, channelopathies † Endocrine/immunological disease-myxoedema, stiff man syndrome † Drug toxicity-statins, azathioprine, chloroquine, colchicines † Miscellaneous-amyloidosis, cystic fibrosis, meningioma, Munchausen syndrome abrupt onset, with relatively little or even absent inflammation on early biopsy, although a milder illness has recently been described in some patients. 29 There are also myositis syndromes associated with autoantibodies that are not specific for myositis, such as anti-RNP. 36 Tests for these autoantibodies are now more widely available, and they are useful for alerting the physician to potentially threatening extramuscular manifestations that require a different approach to treatment, as well as pointing towards new scientific questions.

Myositis and malignancy

The association between inflammatory myopathy and malignancy is well known, and several recent articles have sharpened our understanding of the relationship, although not the basic biology underlying it. Most studies have shown a higher association of malignancy with DM than PM. 37 -39 It has recently been suggested that malignancy may be associated with PM with a greater prevalence than once thought, possibly because of the better classification of inflammatory myopathies. 39 The first large population-based study to address the malignancy association found an increased risk of cancer with both PM and DM. Among 392 patients with DM, the incidence of cancer was 15%, with a relative risk of 2.4 in males and 3.4 in females. Similarly, the incidence of cancer among 396 PM patients was 9%, with a relative risk of 1.7 and 1.8 for males and females, respectively. 40 Nearly 10 years later, in 2001, the myositis -malignancy association was ascertained in a group of 537 patients with biopsy-proven inflammatory myopathy. 41 In this Australian retrospective, populationbased study, the unadjusted incidence of malignancy associated with DM was 42 versus 18% for PM. After adjusting for age and gender, there was a sixfold increase in cancer risk among DM patients compared with the general population (standardized incidence ratio 6.2, 95% CI 3.9 -10.0); a twofold increase was observed in PM patients (standardized incidence ratio 2.0, 95% CI 1.4 -2.7). In these large studies and in the combined analysis of three large Scandinavian studies 42 , the increased incidence declined over the years following the diagnosis but was still measurable as long as 5 years later in DM patients.

Several investigators have tried to ascertain risk factors associated with the development of malignancy in patients with inflammatory myopathy. DM appears to confer more risk than PM, although estimates of the difference between these two subgroups are quite variable. Increasing age, capillary damage on biopsy, cutaneous necrosis, cutaneous leukocytoclastic vasculitis and cutaneous mucinosis all appear to be positive risk factors for myositis-associated malignancy. 40,43 -45 A wide variety of associated malignancies has been reported, but, with a few exceptions, these malignancies are commensurate with the incidence in the general population. Notable exceptions are an increase in frequency reported for cancers of the ovary, breast, lung, stomach, colon, nasopharynx, pancreas and bladder, and for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. 40,42,46 -48 Most recently, urachal adenocarcinoma, anaplastic thyroid carcinoma and recurrent adrenal gland carcinoma have been observed in association with DM. 49 -51 Many stress the importance of the early discovery of any malignancy, but the best cancer-screening regimen necessary for patients with a new diagnosis of myositis, as well as the interval needed between such screenings, is uncertain. 38,42,52 Most agree that an age-and gender-specific work-up should be performed, as well as routine laboratory investigations including a complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, comprehensive metabolic profile, urinalysis and chest radiograph. In women, a pap TREATMENT It is well known that there is a high morbidity and substantial mortality associated with the inflammatory myopathies so the prompt recognition and therapy of these diseases is essential. One series performed a retrospective chart review and determined the overall mortality rate to be as high as 22%, largely as a result of cancer and pulmonary complications. 55 DM has to date proved the most treatable inflammatory myopathy, responding to steroids, intravenous immunoglobulin or immunosuppressants in most cases. PM is also responsive to immunosuppressant therapy, but the response may vary, depending on the autoantibody association and the clinical phenotype. 56 IBM appears to be the most treatment-resistant subset of myositis.

Corticosteroids

Corticosteroids remain the initial agents of choice in the treatment of all the inflammatory myopathies. Although no controlled trial supports the use of corticosteroids, many experts give an initial pulse dose of 1 g intravenously daily for 1 -3 days in an attempt to shorten disease course or enhance the possibility of a clinical remission. The exact duration and dose of subsequent oral therapy has not been studied systematically, and the current dosing regimens are largely based on empirical data and anecdotal evidence. Corticosteroids improve clinical weakness and reduce serum muscle enzyme elevations, and many patients can be managed satisfactorily with alternate-day prednisone. Corticosteroids appear to be most helpful for the improvement of DM and PM. There is clearly a much less robust and sustained response in IBM patients. Steroid-sparing agents are required in a substantial number of patients who respond initially in order to mitigate steroid side effects and to achieve a satisfactory anti-inflammatory response. In many clinics, supplementary therapy is now started very early.

Steroid-sparing agents

Dermatomyositis and polymyositis

Additional immunosuppressive agents currently used in the treatment of autoimmune inflammatory myopathies include azathioprine, methotrexate, cyclophosphamide, mycophenolate mofetil 57,58 , intravenous gammaglobulin 59,60 , tacrolimus 61 and cyclosporin A. 62 Few randomized clinical trials have been conducted with these agents, and the impetus for their use arises from either small case series or the accumulated clinical experience gathered in large clinics. 63 Several reports support the use of combination therapy. Tacrolimus is a promising new effective, well-tolerated therapy for managing refractory ILD and myositis as part of the anti-synthetase syndrome.

Inclusion body myositis

The slow pace of IBM has implications for designing clinical trials to assess therapeutic efficacy in IBM. It suggests that a positive benefit of therapy may only be realized after several years. 64 A comparison of the progression of weakness in IBM during treatment with methotrexate versus placebo in a randomized, double-blind, parallel-group trial demonstrated no statistically significant change in improvement in muscle strength with oral methotrexate; serum creatinine kinase activity was, however, decreased. 65 Neither intravenous immunoglobulin nor a testosterone analogue proved significantly beneficial. 66,67 A pilot study to assess the safety of home exercise programme on muscle function and histopathology found no change in the histopathology or serum creatinine kinase level, but there was a significant decrease in the areas that were stained for the endothelial cell marker EN-4 in the muscle bodies after training. 68 The authors concluded that the home exercise programme was not harmful and did not appear to cause inflammation; thus, exercise may prevent further loss of muscle strength in patients with IBM. The use of interferon-beta is being studied in a pilot trial. 69 

Experimental therapies

A variety of experimental therapies have been reported, usually in single case reports. These therapies have been largely reserved for patients resistant to traditional therapies or those patients with severe manifestations of disease. Therapies have to date included anti-tumour necrosis factor-alpha agents, interferon-gamma (Avonex), haemopoietic stem cell transplantation, total body irradiation and extracorporeal photochemotherapy. 61 A randomized clinical trial to assess the efficacy of infliximab in the treatment of patients with inflammatory myopathies is currently underway at the National Institutes of Health, USA. This is the first large-scale clinical trial of its kind and will help to clarify whether the new biological agents will be an additional therapeutic agent for myositis patients. A co-operative controlled trial of the anti-B-cell agent rituximab will also start soon.

SUMMARY

The inflammatory myopathies of adults-principally DM, PM and IBM-are uncommon, have a high morbidity; are not infrequently the first sign of an associated malignancy; may be part of another connective tissue disease and resemble a number of rarer non-inflammatory diseases from which it is essential to distinguish them. Biopsy is an essential part of the work-up of every patient in whom an inflammatory myopathy is considered, as is a careful search for a possible associated malignancy. The use of MRI has proven very helpful in defining the location and extent of inflammation and therefore in choosing a site for biopsy. The pathogenetic features suggest that DM, PM and IBM are different illnesses. DM and PM are clearly inflammatory, both clinically and histologically, and both generally respond to therapy directed towards inflammation. In addition to corticosteroids, a number of other immunosuppressive agents are useful, especially methotrexate, azathioprine, cyclosporin, cyclophosphamide, intravenous immunoglobulin and tacrolimus; a number of newer biological therapies are in trial. IBM, now recognized as the most common myopathy presenting in patients over the age of 50, tends to have a far more indolent course, less inflammation on biopsy and a modest and incomplete response at best to immunosuppressant therapy. Many consider this primarily a non-inflammatory illness (inclusion body myopathy). Both the diagnosis and therapy of inflammatory myopathies are likely to be much improved by the application of new genetic and molecular techniques, particularly for the more precise selection of targets for therapy.

Research agenda † apply the new techniques of genome analysis, gene expression and proteomics to sharpen diagnosis, particularly in order to distinguish inflammatory from non-inflammatory diseases † use these techniques to select the most appropriate targets for therapy in particular illnesses † define more precisely the role of specific autoimmune responses in the pathogenesis of the inflammatory myopathies † extend the search for genetic mutations as the cause of inclusion body disease † search for the underlying factors predisposing to drug-induced myopathy † develop rigorous disease indices that can be tested and agreed upon internationally for use in co-operative clinical trials so that a uniform standard can be developed by which myositis clinical trials can be compared

Practice points † there is a wide differential diagnosis for the clinical symptoms of muscle weakness. Elevated creatinine kinase and/or aldolase levels do not always indicate myositis † IBM is a common myopathy in patients above the age of 50. It has a distinct clinical manifestation and histological features. It tends to be treatmentresistant and should therefore be considered in the differential diagnosis of myositis in all patients with treatment-resistant disease, even in the younger age group † MRI can serve as a useful adjunct to clinical examination findings, electromyography and muscle biopsy. This imaging modality help to delineate the proper biopsy sites in order to reduce the false-negative biopsy rate, which results in part from sampling error † new knowledge of the inflammatory pathways active in myositis has led to the planning of trials of newer biological agents targeting those pathways

smear, mammography, uterine ultrasound and serum CA-125 level are warranted. It is generally accepted that a digital rectal examination should be performed and a serum prostate-specific antigen measurement made in male patients over 50 years of age. Upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy are generally recommended in older adults. Patients in high-risk categories-such as those with a family history of colon or breast cancer, or smokers-should undergo a more thorough evaluation. Pan-scanning techniques that image the entire body are not routinely recommended.

There are insufficient data upon which to recommend when, after a negative workup for malignancy, the work-up should be repeated, but heightened vigilance, including careful physical examinations and routine laboratory tests, for several years is certainly in order. There are published reports of ovarian carcinoma occurring as late as 5 years after the diagnosis of DM, suggesting that a biannual serum CA-125 serum assay in concert with an annual pelvic examination and transvaginal ultrasound are warranted. 53 

Drug-associated myopathies

There are numerous drugs that induce myopathies (Table 4), including and most notably the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins). Myalgias were observed in as many as 11% of study participants in large clinical trials of statin therapy, but clinically significant myositis with a serum muscle elevation greater than 10 times normal occurred in fewer than 1 in 200 patients. Myalgias and cramps are the most common muscle-related complaints reported with lipid-lowering drugs. The concomitant use of certain drugs (including cyclosporin, nicotinic acid and fibrates), and the co-existence of other disease states (including uncontrolled hypothyroidism and mitochondrial myopathies), appears to potentiate the muscle toxicity conferred by the statin drug class. 54 It appears likely that statin-induced myopathy has a more benign clinical course than has previously been reported. Whether or not there is a genetic predisposition to developing a myopathy when taking statins or indeed other drugs is of great interest and needs to be explored. 

Table 2 .2Features leading away from a diagnosis of myositis. † Family history of a similar illness † Weakness related to exercise, eating or fasting Atrophy early, or hypertrophy at any time † Creatine kinase level ,2 £ or .100 £ elevated† Sensory, reflex or other neurological signs† Cranial nerve involvement† Fasciculations† Muscle cramping-severe† Myasthenia† Myotonia†

Table 1 .1Features pointing towards a diagnosis of myositis. † Rashes-heliotrope, Gottron's sign † Gradual onset-weeks to months (except inclusion body myositis, which has an onset over years) † Symmetry † Proximal limb and truncal involvement † Other connective tissue disease features, e.g. Raynaud's syndrome, arthritis † Lung disease, e.g. IPF, unexplained infiltrates

