The use of intravenous immunoglobulin in the treatment of autoimmune neuromuscular diseases: evidence-based indications and safety profile

Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) has multiple actions on the immunoregulatory network that operate in concert with each other. For each autoimmune neuromuscular disease, however, there is a predominant mechanism of action that relates to the underlying immunopathogenetic cause of the respective disorder. The best understood actions of IVIg include the following: (a) modulation of pathogenic autoantibodies, an effect relevant in myasthenia gravis (MG), Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS), Guillain-Barre śyndrome (GBS), chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP), and stiff-person syndrome (SPS); (b) inhibition of complement activation and interception of membranolytic attack complex (MAC) formation, an action relevant to the complement-mediated mechanisms involved in GBS, CIDP, MG, and dermatomyositis (DM); (c) modulation of the inhibitory or activation Fc receptors on macrophages invading targeted tissues in nerve and muscle, as seen in CIDP, GBS, and inflammatory myopathies; (d) down-regulation of pathogenic cytokines and adhesion molecules; (e) suppression of T-cell functions; and (f) interference with antigen recognition.

Controlled clinical trials have shown that IVIg is effective as first-line therapy in patients with GBS, CIDP, and multifocal motor neuropathy (MMN), and as second-line therapy in DM, MG, LEMS, and SPS. In paraproteinemic IgM anti-MAG (myelin-associated glycoprotein) demyelinating polyneuropathies and inclusion body myositis (IBM), the benefit is variable, marginal, and not statistically significant. IVIg has a remarkably good safety record for long-term administration, however, the following side effects have been observed: mild, infusion-rate-related reactions, such as headaches, myalgia, or fever; moderate but inconsequential events, such as aseptic meningitis and skin rash; and severe, but rare, complications, such as thromboembolic events and renal tubular necrosis. Future studies are needed to (a) find the appropriate dose and frequency of infusions that maintain a response; (b) address pharmacoeconomics, comparing the high cost of IVIg to the cost of the other therapies, which, although less expensive, cause significantly more long-term side effects; (c) determine why some patients respond better than others; and (d) examine the merits of combining IVIg with other immunosuppressive drugs.

Introduction

During the last 10 years, the use of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) has had a major impact on the treatment of autoimmune neuromuscular disorders. Its relative safety for long-term therapy and undisputable efficacy have changed our therapeutic approach of these diseases (Dalakas, 1999b(Dalakas, , 2004a,b),b). In some disorders, IVIg is as effective as plasma exchange or steroids but safer and easier to administer; in others, it is superior to existing drugs; and in still others, it is better than anything else currently available. As a result, we have been able to treat patients with previously untreatable disorders and manage patients resistant to conventional therapies without side effects (Dalakas, 1997b(Dalakas, , 1999b(Dalakas, , 2004b;;Stangel et al., 1998). Based on controlled, but not FDA-approved, clinical trials, IVIg has been effective in various acute and chronic demyelinating neuropathies, neuromuscular transmission defects, inflammatory myopathies, and stiff-person syndrome (Dalakas, 1999b(Dalakas, , 2004a,b),b). The success and enthusiasm in treating effectively and safely such immunologically diverse disorders has led clinicians to use the drug more liberally even in diseases where the data are weak and not evidence-based or in patients with coexistent conditions that increase the risk for complications. As a result, the cost of IVIg has escalated and catastrophic side effects, although rare, have been observed. Because all indications for IVIg in neurology are still ''off-label,'' these issues have generated considerable skepticism and scrutiny from insurance carriers, healthcare organizations, and government agencies.

In this article, I will present the evidence-based indications of IVIg in autoimmune neuromuscular diseases, summarize practical guidelines for the practicing neurologists on how best to make judicious decisions in the use of the drug, address the known mechanisms of action based on work carried out in vitro, in animal models, and in clinical studies, and describe the safety concerns associated with the administration of the drug.

General issues regarding the intravenous immunoglobulin products

Each batch of IVIg is made by cold ethanol fractionation (Cohn's process) of human plasma derived from pools of 3,000 to 10,000 donors (Dwyer, 1992;Dalakas, 1997b). The product is purified by enzymatic treatment at low pH, followed by fractionation and chromatography. Treatment with solvents and detergents applied by many companies has been important for inactivating hepatitis C and other viruses (Schiff, 1994). Two new procedures have now been introduced to maximize viral safety while preserving all biological activities. One is the addition of caprylate, a naturally occurring fatty acid widely distributed in animal and vegetable fats, which precipitates non-IgG proteins and inactivates enveloped viruses; caprylate is then removed by anion exchange chromatography to obtain purified IgG (Roifman et al., 2003). It seems that this method reduces the remote probability of effectively transmitting prions, if they were present in the source plasma. The second procedure recently introduced is nanofiltration, a powerful measure of filtering out viruses, including prion particles. In the final product, the purified immunoglobulin is stabilized with glucose, maltose, glycine, sucrose, mannitol, or albumin. The marketed IVIg contains more than 95% IgG, less than 2.5% IgA, and negligible amount of IgM (Dwyer, 1992;Roifman et al., 2003). Among the IgG subclasses, IgG 1 varies from 55% to 70%, IgG 2 from 0% to 6%, and IgG 4 from 0.7% to 2.6%, according to the size and composition of the donor pools used in the various proprietary IVIg preparations. Not all the IVIg preparations are the same in reference to osmolality, stabilizing agents, content of IgA, subclasses of IgG, pH, and formulation (lyophilized or liquid forms); however, there is no evidence that the biological action is different among the various products.

Based on kinetic studies that we have performed, after an intravenous infusion of 2g/kg IVIg (the standard dose used to treat neurological diseases), the serum IgG level increases 5-fold, but it declines by 50% in 72 hr and returns to the pretreatment level after 21 -28 days (Sekul et al., 1994;Dalakas, 1997bDalakas, , 2002b)). The marked initial decrease reflects extravascular redistribution. The half-life of IVIg is f 18 -32 days, which is similar to that of native immunoglobulin. During the first 48 hr of the infusion when serum IgG level is high, IgG also enters the cerebrospinal fluid where its concentration increases as much as 2-fold, but returns to normal within a week (Sekul et al., 1994;Dalakas, 1997bDalakas, , 2002b)). The infused IVIg may enter freely the end-plate region and bathe the nerve roots that lack blood-CSF barrier; it is unknown, however, whether it also exerts a local effect on those areas, complementing its general immunomodulatory effect on the immune network, as discussed below.

Mechanisms of action of intravenous immunoglobulin

There is overwhelming evidence that IVIg has multiple actions, which often operate in concert with each other. For each neuromuscular disorder, however, there appears to be a predominant mechanism dictated by the underlying immunopathogenetic cause of the respective disorder. Some of these mechanisms have been reasonably well explored in vivo or in vitro, others are based on information derived from other autoimmune diseases in which IVIg has been effective, and still others remain hypothetical requiring better documentation. Among the main mechanisms of action of IVIg (Kazatchkine & Kaveri, 2001;Dalakas, 2002b), those relevant to the efficacy of the drug in autoimmune neuromuscular disorders include the following (Table 1 and Fig. 1):

Effect on autoantibodies

The IgG of normal humans contains low-titer antibodies against a wide spectrum of human proteins and anti-idiotypic antibodies directed against Fah, the antigen-binding region of these autoantibodies (Dwyer, 1992;Kazatchkine et al., 1994;Dalakas, 1997b). Because IVIg preparations are derived from a large pool of human donors, the IgG molecules within the IVIg contain antibodies with a wide range of idiotypic and anti-idiotypic specificities. While the anti-idiotypic IgG antibodies in one individual donor are circulated in a monomeric form, the IgG antibody complexes within IVIg form dimeric pairs. Electron microscopy of IVIg specimens has demonstrated that 40% of the IgG molecules form dimers, which are connected by double-or single-arm binding between their F(ahV) 2 domains (Tankersley et al., 1988). The larger the pool of donors, the higher the number of the F(ahV) 2 dimeric pairs and the wider the expected spectrum of idiotypic-anti-idiotypic specificities (Roux & Tankersley, 1990).

Infused IVIg affects autoantibodies by 3 mechanisms. First, it supplies anti-idiotypic antibodies, which have the potential to bind to and neutralize pathogenic autoantibodies, thereby preventing their interaction with the autoantigen. This effect has been shown experimentally, when extracted F(ahV) 2 fragments of IVIg bound to and neutralized known autoantibodies, such as anti-DNA, anti-acetylcholine receptor (AChR), anti-thyroglobulin, anti-GM 1 , and others (Dietrich & Kazatchkine, 1990;Kazatchkine et al., 1994;Malik et al., 1996;Kaveri et al., 1997). The idiotypic/ anti-idiotypic effect has been also shown in patients with acute GBS whose serum contains various IgG glycolipid antibodies. In an in vitro nerve-muscle preparation, the F(ahV) 2 portion of IVIg neutralized the ''blocking'' effect exerted by the serum of acute GBS patients on the quantal release (Buchwald et al., 2002;Dalakas, 2002a). Second, the anti-idiotypic antibodies within IVIg may also affect antibody production by exerting negative signals on B cells when bound to antigenic determinants on the surface of the IgM or IgG molecules on B cells (Uher & Dickler, 1986;Diegel et al., 1994). Because IVIg contains antibodies against CD 5 molecules, it may also suppress antibody production by affecting the autoantibody-producing CD 20 + (B1) subset of B cells (Vassilev et al., 1993). Third, IVIg may accelerate the catabolism of IgG antibodies by saturating the protective transport receptors, called FcRn, in the endocytotic vesicles. Normally, IgG antibodies bind to FcRn to return intact in the circulation (Yu & Lennon, 1999) and avoid degradation in the lysosomes. The large amount of IgG within the IVIg preparations could theoretically saturate the FcRn and accelerate the catabolism of endog-enous pathogenic IgG thereby reducing the level of pathogenic autoantibodies (Yu & Lennon, 1999). Such an IgGdepleting mechanism is interesting but still theoretical.

The above-mentioned effects of IVIg on autoantibodies may be relevant in the antibody-mediated autoimmune neuromuscular diseases where IVIg is proven effective, such as myasthenia gravis (MG), Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS), SPS, and the antibody-mediated demyelinating neuropathies (Guillain-Barre ´syndrome [GBS], chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy [CIDP], multifocal motor neuropathy [MMN]) (Table 1).

Inhibition of complement binding and prevention of membranolytic attack complex formation

The effect of IVIg on complement binding has been demonstrated in vitro, in animal models, and in patients who received IVIg. In early studies, IVIg was shown to prevent death in guinea pigs from the complement-dependent Forssman shock by inhibiting the uptake of complement C 3 and C 4 fragments to the endothelial cells (Basta et al., 1989). In patients with dermatomyositis (DM), which is a complement-dependent microangiopathy mediated by activation of C 3 and deposition of membranolytic attack complex (MAC) on the endomysial capillaries (Dalakas, 1991;Dalakas & Hohlfeld, 2003), IVIg is not only clinically effective as discussed below (Dalakas et al., 1993), but it also inhibits complement uptake and intercepts the formation and deposition of MAC on the endomysial capillaries (Fig. 2; Basta & Dalakas, 1994). Post-IVIg, but not post-placebo serum, inhibits the uptake of C 3b and C 4b fragments by sensitized in vitro targets, probably due to formation of covalent or noncovalent complexes between C 3 and specific receptor sites within the infused IgG molecules (Basta & Dalakas, 1994). Such an inhibition limits the available C 3 molecules for further incorporation into the C 5 convertase assembly, thereby preventing the formation and in situ deposition of MAC, as confirmed in the repeated muscle biopsy specimens of patients with DM treated with IVIg (Basta & Dalakas, 1994;Dalakas, 1998aDalakas, , 1998bDalakas, , 1993Dalakas, , 2004aDalakas, , 2004b) (Fig. 2). The effect of IVIg on the complement, as proven in DM, is a fundamental action of IVIg that is directly relevant to GBS, CIDP, and MG, where the complement pathway is activated (Basta et al., 1996) and complement fragments are fixed in the targeted tissues (Dalakas, 1999b).

Modulation or blockade of Fc receptors on macrophages

There are specific Fc receptors for each class of immunoglobulin. IgG molecules bind through their Fc region of Fcg receptors on hematopoietic cells, such as macrophages. FcgR receptors with intracellular ''immune receptor tyrosine-based activation or inhibition motifs'' mediate inflammation or immune effector functions via activation or  inhibitory signaling (Kazatchkine & Kaveri, 2001;Samuelsson et al., 2001). The ratio of expression of the inhibitory and activation FcgR receptors determines the final immune response; overexpression of FcgR I and FcgR III favors activation, whereas overexpression of FcgR II infers inhibition of phagocytosis and interception of antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (Kazatchkine & Kaveri, 2001;Samuelsson et al., 2001). IVIg may induce blockade of the Fc receptors on phagocytic cells by saturating, altering, or down-regulating the affinity of the Fc receptors, a process that may render sensitized phagocytic cells unable to exert their action (Dalakas, 1997b(Dalakas, , 1998b)). Alternatively, IVIg up-regulates the inhibitory FcgR II receptors and modulates the FcgR II/ FcgR III ratio on macrophages (Samuelsson et al., 2001). In GBS and CIDP, an effect on the Fc receptors on the macrophages could inhibit the macrophage-mediated phagocytosis of antigen-bearing target cells and might intercept the macrophage-mediated demyelination or the antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (Fig. 1; Dalakas, 1997bDalakas, , 1998bDalakas, , 2002b). An increase in the number of monocytes bearing the FcgR II inhibitory receptors and an increase in the FcgR II/ FcgR III ratio on monocytes has been noted 1 week after IVIg in GBS and CIDP patients who started to improve, suggesting that such inhibitory signaling may be clinically relevant (Creange et al., 2003).

Suppression of pathogenic cytokines and other immunoregulatory molecules

In vitro and in vivo studies have shown that IVIg causes a dose-dependent down-regulation of tissue expression or reduction in the circulating levels of cytokines and adhesion molecules, such as IL I , TNF-a, IL 1h , TGF-h, and TGF-h mRNA, major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC-I), ICAM-I on the endothelial cells, and lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1 (LFA-1) on activated T-cells (Svenson et al., 1993;Rigal et al., 1994;Abe et al., 1994;Ankrust et al., 1999;Amemiya et al., 2000). The effect on ICAM-I and TGF-h has been convincingly shown in the repeated muscle biopsies of patients with DM who improved after IVIg therapy (Dalakas et al., 1993;Amemiya et al., 2000) and the effect on ICAM-I on the lymphocytes of GBS patients 1 week after infusion with IVIg (Creange et al., 2003). Because up-regulation of cytokines and adhesion molecules is critical in almost all of the autoimmune neuromuscular diseases in which IVIg appears to be effective (Dalakas, 1997b;Stangel et al., 1998), its down-regulatory effect on these molecules is probably pathogenetically relevant (Table 1). Whether such an effect is a downstream event related to an upstream effect on the primary immune process of the disease remains unclear.

Miscellaneous actions relevant to autoimmune neuromuscular diseases

Effect on superantigens

IVIg contains neutralizing antibodies against epitopes of superantigens and antibodies against the Vh 3 , Vh 8 , and Vh 17 gene families of the T-cell receptor peptides (Marchalonis et al., 1992). Superantigens (i.e., bacterial toxins, enterotoxins, and viruses) stimulate a large fraction of Vh chain-expressing unsensitized T-cells and increase cytokine secretion and may play a role in breaking tolerance or triggering relapses in certain autoimmune neuromuscular diseases, such as MG, CIDP, or GBS (Dalakas, 1995c). IVIg neutralizes superantigens, as shown Fig. 2. Complement activation pathway that leads to C 3 fragments and formation of MAC (A). Dramatic suppression of C 3 uptake by IVIg in patients with DM is noted as early as 2 days after the infusion (B). The inhibition of C 3 should intercept the formation of MAC, as shown above (A). Indeed, after IVIg, C 3b and MAC deposits were not detected anymore in repeated muscle biopsies of DM patients (C) (Basta & Dalakas, 1994). in Kawasaki's disease (Takei et al., 1993), and could prevent the activation and clonal expansion of superantigen-triggered cytotoxic T-cells. Such an effect may be relevant in influencing the relapses triggered by infections, as seen in MG and certain autoimmune neuropathies, like CIDP.

Modulation of T-cell function and antigen recognition

IVIg induces transient lymphopenia, which is not dilutional, as demonstrated with controlled trials in which lymphopenia was noted only after infusion of IVIg and not an equal volume of placebo (Koffman & Dalakas, 1997). IVIg also contains a variable amount of solubilized CD 4 , CD 8 , HLA-I, HLA-II molecules, and TGF-h that may interfere with antigen recognition by T-cells (Blasczyk et al., 1993;Kekow et al., 1998). It also contains antibodies that recognize a highly conserved peptide sequence of the a 1 helix of the HLA-I molecule (Kaveri et al., 1996). These antibodies bind to soluble and membrane-associated HLA-I antigen and may theoretically have an effect on inhibiting CD 8 -mediated cytotoxicity, a process relevant to several Tcell-mediated autoimmune neuromuscular diseases, especially polymyositis (Dalakas & Hohlfeld, 2003).

Interaction with antigen-presenting cells

IVIg has recently been shown to inhibit the differentiation and maturation of dendritic cells and down-regulate costimulatory molecules associated with cytokine secretion and antigen presentation (Bayry et al., 2003a(Bayry et al., , 2003b)). Such an effect is relevant to all the autoimmune diseases in which IVIg exerts an immunomodulatory effect (Fig. 1).

Possible effect on remyelination

Treatment with IVIg suppresses experimental allergic encephalomyelitis and experimental allergic neuritis (Gabriel et al., 1997), probably via a combined effect on the immunoregulatory network mentioned above. Whether it also enhances remyelination by an effect directly on the myelin sheath, as suggested (van Engelson et al., 1994), remains to be determined.

Status of intravenous immunoglobulin in autoimmune neuromuscular disorders: evidence from controlled clinical trials

Guillain-Barre ´syndrome

GBS is an acute demyelinating polyneuropathy that peaks within 2 weeks of onset and causes severe weakness or paralysis of the limbs and respiratory muscles. Although the target antigen is still unknown, humoral and cellular immune mechanisms are implicated, as evidenced by activation of complement and deposition of MAC on the myelin sheath, the presence of circulating antiganglioside, or glycolipid antibodies, an increase of T-cell activation products and cytokines, and invasion of the myelin sheath by sensitized macrophages (Hartung et al., 1995;Hafer-Macko et al., 1996a, 1996b;Hahn, 1998;Gold et al., 2003).

During the first week of the illness, the recommended therapy for patients with GBS who have severe disease and require assistance to walk has been plasmapheresis. This conclusion has been based on controlled clinical trials, which showed that plasmapheresis hastens recovery in as many as 52% of patients, compared with 38% of patients receiving sham apheresis (Guillain-Barre ´Study Group, 1985;French Cooperative Group, 1987). IVIg has now been shown to have comparable effects. The first controlled, randomized trial concluded that IVIg is not only effective but may be superior to plasmapheresis. In this study, as many as 52.7% of 74 patients receiving IVIg, compared with 34% of 73 patients undergoing plasmapheresis, had functional improvement of 1 grade or more after 4 weeks (van der Meche et al., 1992). Although each treatment is beneficial, combining IVIg with PE produces no incremental response. This conclusion was based on a second study, which compared, in parallel, the efficacy of IVIg therapy alone (5-day regimen of 0.4 g/kg/day), plasmapheresis alone, and plasmapheresis followed by IVIg therapy. After 4 weeks of therapy and 48 weeks of follow-up, no statistically significant difference was seen among the 3 treatments in outcome measures including time to unaided walking and discontinuation of ventilation (Plasma Exchange/Sandoglobulin GBS Trial Group, 1997). A pilot study of patients with the GBS, which combined IVIg and 500 mg iv methylprednisone, showed that the combination was better than IVIg therapy alone (Dutch Guillain-Barre ´Study Group, 1994). However, a controlled, randomized trial recently completed showed no benefit of steroids (van Koningsveld et al., 2004). In atypical GBS, such as Miller-Fisher variant (Arakawa et al., 1993), acute dysautonomia, or other variants, IVIg appears to be efficacious but controlled studies have not been conducted.

Dosing

Insight into the optimal IVIg dosing in GBS was provided by another study comparing IVIg 1.2 g/kg given in 3 days and 2.4g/kg given in 6 days (Raphael et al., 2001). The study showed that the time to walking with assistance was shorter in the 6-day group (84 vs. 131) and significantly shorter in ventilated patients. Also, the proportion of patients who recovered full muscular strength at 1 year was greater in the 6 day group, concluding that a full dose of at least 2g/kg is more beneficial in GBS patients who need ventilatory assistance.

Early relapses

In some patients with the GBS, early relapse may occur after the initial beneficial response to plasmapheresis or IVIg therapy (Castro & Ropper, 1993). Based on the 2 large controlled trials, it is clear that relapses occur almost equally in patients treated first with plasmapheresis and those treated first with IVIg therapy (van der Meche et al., 1992; Plasma Exchange/Sandoglobulin GBS Trial Group, 1997;Visser et al., 1998). Another retrospective study of 54 patients also confirmed that there are no increased relapses in patients treated with IVIg as opposed to plasmapheresis (Romano et al., 1998). An associated medical condition appears to correlate best with an increased risk of relapses, while earlier treatment onset is associated with a lesser chance for relapse (Romano et al., 1998).

Need for a second intravenous immunoglobulin infusion

A common clinical dilemma in managing patients with GBS is to determine the need for a second IVIg infusion when 3 weeks after the first infusion improvement has either not occurred or is deemed inadequate. There is a clinical challenge to try a second IVIg infusion, but the available data are not adequate to support such practice. Anecdotal information from very few patients that a second infusion, 3 -4 weeks later, may be beneficial for those patients who have not yet improved (Farcas et al., 1997), needs confirmation with a controlled study because the natural course of the disease confounds, such assessments.

Intravenous immunoglobulin in childhood Guillain-Barre ´syndrome

The easy access of IVIg and its administration without the need to put a central line has made IVIg the treatment of choice in children with GBS, although its effectiveness in this population has been based on uncontrolled trials or small series of patients (Reisin et al., 1996;Kanra et al., 1997;Kornberg, 2004). Nine such children treated with IVIg (1 g/kg body weight/day, for 2 days) recovered more rapidly compared with 9 others not treated. In another study, IVIg shortened the recovery of moderately afflicted children compared with the more severely affected ones who did not differ from historic controls (Reisin et al., 1996). In a large cumulative study from 2 centers involving 75 children, IVIg was effective with a faster rate of recovery in the patients who received a total dose in 2 days as opposed to 5 days (Kanra et al., 1997), supporting further our view that a 2-day infusion may be more effective than a 5-day infusion, as discussed below. A beneficial effect of IVIg in speeding recovery and reducing morbidity in childhood GBS was also suggested by a retrospective record review of 37 patients treated with IVIg compared with 67 historical controls (Kornberg, 2004) Undoubtedly, IVIg remains the treatment of choice in childhood GBS, although large controlled studies are not available and may not be done.

Correlation of responsiveness to GM 1 antibodies, Campylobacter jejuni infection and motor predominance

In patients with the predominantly axonal form of GBS (the acute motor or motor-sensory axonal neuropathy), the disease is more often associated with Campylobacter jejuni infection and GM 1 antibodies. Although it was thought that these patients may not recover well, studies of Chinese cases do not show differences in the degree of recovery between the axonal and demyelinating types of disease (Kornberg et al., 1994;Ho et al., 1997aHo et al., , 1997b)). A subgroup of such patients may even respond better to IVIg than to plasmapheresis (Visser et al., 1998). Further, some patients with IgG anti-GM 1 antibodies may recover faster than the GM 1 -negative patients (Kuwabara et al., 1998). In general, it seems that the presence of anti-GM 1 antibodies in GBS patients is not a marker of poor recovery. Instead, the degree of axonal degeneration especially proximally, or perhaps infection with Campylobacter jejuni (Rees et al., 1995), appears to be associated with less favorable outcome. Analysis from the multicenter trial however showed that the outcomes in response to IVIg or plasmapheresis is the same in all subsets of GBS, including patients with the demyelinating or axonal forms, patients with inexcitable nerves, and patients with pure motor forms, regardless of a antecedent Campylobacterrelated diarrhea (Plasma Exchange/Sandoglobulin GBS Trial Group, 1997).

Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy

CIDP is a distinct acquired demyelinating polyneuropathy characterized by the slow onset (over weeks to months) of weakness, areflexia, and impaired sensation. The immunopathologic alternations in CIDP, although fragmentary, are considered similar to GBS (Kieseier et al., 2002;Gold et al., 2003). Molecular mimicry, antiglycolipid antibodies, Tcell sensitization, myelin invasion by activated macrophages, and activation of complement are the main immunopathological features of the disease (Weiss et al., 1998;Yuki, 2001;Kieseier et al., 2002;Gold et al., 2003). However, unlike GBS, which is a monophasic disease, CIDP requires longterm therapy to maintain improvement. Steroids have long been considered the first choice for treating CIDP, hence its designation as a ''steroid-responsive neuropathy.'' Evidence from controlled studies, however, has shown that plasmapheresis and IVIg are also effective in CIDP and their efficacy is similar or even superior to steroids.

A randomized, controlled, crossover study compared a 6week course of oral prednisolone (tapered from 60 to 10 mg/ day) with a 2-day course of IVIg 1.0 g/kg/day for the treatment of CIDP (Hughes et al., 2001). Treatment was switched after a 4-week washout period. Both treatments produced significant improvements in disability after 2 weeks, although there was slightly more improvement with IVIg in the 2 treatment periods. Also observed were improvements favoring IVIg in the time to walk 10 meters after 2 weeks and disability grade after 6 weeks. IVIg was also equal to plasma exchange (PE) in a single-blind, controlled, crossover study of CIDP patients assigned to a 6-week course of PE or IVIg 0.2-0.4 g/kg given weekly (Dyck et al., 1994). Similar improvements in neurological disability occurred with IVIg compared with placebo in a parallel controlled study (Hahn et al., 1996).

The position of IVIg in the hierarchy of CIDP treatment was investigated in a 3-year placebo-controlled study of IVIg in treatment-naive patients (Mendell et al., 2001). Patients received an infusion of IVIg 1.0 g/kg/day or placebo on days 1, 2, and 21. Differences in muscle strength favoring IVIg were seen as early as day 10, and this trend increased over time. At day 42, muscle strength had improved significantly more with IVIg than with placebo ( P = 0.006) and functional performance was also significantly better ( P = 0.019). These findings support IVIg as first-line therapy in the early inflammatory phase of CIDP, a strategy that could ameliorate the significant axonal degeneration that typically accompanies disease progression (Dalakas, 1999a).

A number of disease-associated variants of CIDP have been identified (Dalakas, 1999a;Saperstein et al., 2001). Although IVIg seems to be effective in these forms, formal controlled trials have not been conducted. Some reports indicate that 12 -18% of patients with diabetes meet the electrophysiologic criteria for CIDP and the risk of CIDP is 11 times greater in those with type 2 diabetes than in those without diabetes (Sharma et al., 2002). According to anecdotal reports, 20-80% of patients with demyelinating polyneuropathy in the setting of diabetes respond to IVIg treatment, but the response rate depends on how the disease is defined. Clearly, a controlled study is needed to establish the potential role and efficacy of IVIg in diabetes-associated CIDP.

Maintenance therapy

The IVIg-triggered improvement generally begins after a mean period of 9 days and reaches maximum improvement after 4 -6 weeks. Repeated treatments, preferably with the 2-g/kg dose every 4 -6 weeks intervals, are needed to maintain response. Whether lower doses, up to 1 g/kg, are sufficient to maintain improvement (Hahn et al., 1996), needs further confirmation. A number of patients who respond to IVIg may show a less consistent response in subsequent infusions, and others may not respond fully from the beginning. In general, CIDP may be more difficult to treat if axonal changes have become extensive, regardless of the regimen used.

Starting therapy and predictors of response

The choice of initiating therapy with prednisone, IVIg, or plasmapheresis (all effective in controlled trials) is judged against cost, long-term side effects, patient age, venous access, disease severity, and concurrent illnesses IVIg is becoming the treatment of choice but some investigators still prefer to start with steroids. If steroids are contraindicated, have produced unacceptable side effects, or become ineffective, IVIg therapy is preferable because it is easier to administer than plasmapheresis. It remains unclear, however, why some patients respond predominately to IVIg, others to prednisone, and still others to plasmapheresis. Combination therapy is often appropriate. Factors proposed to be associated with a better response to IVIg include (a) disease duration of less than 1 year; (b) progression of weakness until treatment; (c) absence of discrepancy in weakness between arms and legs; (d) areflexia of the arms; and (e) slowing of motor conduction velocities of the median nerve (all signs of ongoing, generalized, and recentonset demyelination). The chances for a favorable response to IVIg are up to 90% for improvement if all the above 5 parameters are met (Vermeulen et al., 1993)). In another study, patients with acutely relapsing CIDP were more likely (71%) to respond to IVIg (Hahn et al., 1996). It is our experience that patients with less severe axonal changes improve much better, hence the need to initiate therapy early.

Cost remains a significant factor in determining how to start therapy. Early on, IVIg is much more costly than prednisone. After 2-3 years, however, for those patients treated with prednisone alone, the irreversible steroid side effects (osteoporosis, cataracts, diabetes, hypertension, obesity), the seemingly incomplete response, the frequent doctor visits, the time lost from work, and quality of life issues may prove to be competitive in cost to IVIg. Pharmacoeconomic assessments are needed for the long term, and such an effort has already begun (McCrone et al., 2003).

Intravenous immunoglobulin in children

Although controlled studies have not been done, IVIg is also efficacious in childhood CIDP (Nevo et al., 1996;Kornberg, 2004). Multiple courses of IVIg appear to secure continuous efficacy (Simmons et al., 1997). We have found the need to combine alternate day prednisone with IVIg in difficult cases with considerable success and minimal toxicity. Treatment can be at times discontinued and in that sense, childhood CIDP may have a more favorable outcome than CIDP in adults.

Multifocal motor neuropathy

Multifocal motor neuropathy (MMN) presents with a slow-onset weakness and muscular atrophy, usually in the distal upper extremities, with areflexia and preserved sensation. The disease is characterized by conduction block of the motor axons and, in many patients, by the presence of antibodies to the GM 1 ganglioside. Unlike CIDP, MMN does not respond to steroids or plasmapheresis. However, based on controlled trials and several open-label studies, MMN responds remarkably well to IVIg therapy (Chaudhry et al., 1993;Nobile-Orazio et al., 1993;Nobile-Orazio, 2001;Azulay et al., 1994;Leger et al., 1994;Bouche et al., 1995;Van den Berg et al., 1995;Van den Berg et al., 1998;Federico et al., 2000;Van den Berg-Vos et al., 2002). The improvement usually begins after 7 -10 days, as in CIDP, and lasts 4 -6 weeks, at which time a new 2-g/kg infusion is required. We have noticed that even chronic cases of MMN with already significant loss of motor axons can respond to a certain degree (Dalakas et al., 1994). As symptoms diminish, the electrophysiologic conduction block may resolve (Federico et al., 2000).

Therapy with IVIg is currently the treatment of choice in MMN. However, some patients may not respond adequately after a period, probably because of further progression of the underlying disease and axonal degeneration (Van den Berg-Vos et al., 2002;Terenghi et al., 2004). In these circumstances, co-administration of intravenous cyclophosphamide, as much as 1 g/m 2 body surface area, may be helpful (Elliott & Pestronk, 1994). The long-term maintenance therapy with IVIg was recently investigated in 11 MMN patients, followed for 4-8 years (Van den Berg-Vos et al., 2002;Terenghi et al., 2004). Patients initially received IVIg 0.4 g/kg/day for 5 days followed by one 0.4-g/kg infusion every week for 1 year and, as needed, in subsequent years with a mean dose of 7 -48 g/wk. Muscle strength improved significantly within 3 weeks of IVIg treatment but declined slightly and significantly during the follow-up period. Interestingly, electrophysiologic changes consistent with improvement (remyelination or reinnervation) and worsening (demyelination or axon loss) occurred simultaneously in different nerves. Conduction block also disappeared in some nerve segments but appeared in others. These results suggest that IVIg maintenance treatment is beneficial in MMN and affects the immunopathology of the disease, but the disease continues to progress and improvement is not sustained. Whether the benefit of IVIg is related to its ability to inhibit GM 1 antibodies (Yuki & Miyaga, 1996) remains unclear.

Patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, which sometimes resembles MMN, do not respond to IVIg. In a study of 9 patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, IVIg treatment failed to change the course of the disease (Dalakas et al., 1994).

Paraproteinemic demyelinating polyneuropathies

Demyelinating polyneuropathies associated with IgG or IgA monoclonal gammopathies respond to therapy like patients with CIDP. Patients with IgM monoclonal gammopathy and demyelinating polyneuropathy (IgM-DP), however, form a distinct subset. More than 50% of these patients have antibodies against myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG) and sphingoglycolipids and comprises a more uniform group, which is clinically characterized by a predominantly sensory ataxic or a sensorimotor neuropathy. Because patients with anti-MAG neuropathies respond poorly to therapies, a double-blind controlled study with IVIg was performed (Dalakas et al., 1996). The study was prompted after the improvement observed in 2 patients treated with IVIg in an open-labeled fashion (Cook et al., 1990).

Eleven patients were randomized to IVIg or placebo, given monthly for 3 months in a double-blind study. After a washout period, they crossed over to the alternate therapy. The trial showed modest benefits. After IVIg, strength improved in only 2 of 11 patients and declined after placebo; in another patient, only the sensory scores improved (Dalakas et al., 1996). Antibody titers to MAG/ SGPG or gangliosides did not change appreciably but a loose correlation was found between response and affinity binding of antibodies to MAG (Weiss et al., 1999). A second recent trial also showed modest but statistically significant benefit in the secondary end-points (Comi et al., 2002). Because elevated IgM may cause high serum viscosity, which can be further increased with IVIg as discussed below, caution is needed when IVIg is infused in such patients to avoid triggering thromboembolic events.

Dermatomyositis

DM is an acquired myopathy causing proximal muscle weakness and a violaceous rash on the face and extremities. Early deposition of MAC on the endomysial capillaries leads to capillary destruction, muscle ischemia, and inflammation. Cytokines and adhesion molecules participate in the trafficking of sensitized lymphocytes and macrophages from intramuscular blood vessels to muscle fibers (Dalakas, 1991;Dalakas & Hohlfeld, 2003). The disease responds to steroids but often becomes steroid-resistant. Azathioprine, methotrexate, or cyclosporine offers modest benefit but rarely cause a remission. Administration of IVIg to patients with DM produces striking clinical benefits in parallel with histopathologic improvements. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled study, 15 patients with treatment-resistant DM received IVIg 2.0 g/kg or placebo once a month for 3 months, with the option of crossing over to the alternative therapy for 3 more months (Dalakas et al., 1993). At the end of the first 3-month treatment phase, IVIg-treated patients experienced a significant improvement in Medical Research Council scores ( P < 0.018) and neuromuscular symptoms ( P < 0.035) compared with those receiving placebo. The improvement becomes noticeable about 15 days after the first IVIg infusion, and it is clear and definitive after the second infusion. Marked improvement of the active violaceous rash or the chronic scaly eruptions on the knuckles is also noted (Dalakas et al., 1993). In subsequent open-label infusions, the benefit of IVIg was documented in more than 15 patients treated by us or under our supervision in several institutions (Dalakas, 1998a). This has been also the experience of others (Mastaglia et al., 1998).

Repeat open muscle biopsies on patients who clinically improved have shown marked improvement in the muscle cytoarchitecture including muscle fiber diameter, revascularization with increased number of capillaries per fiber, and reduction of inflammation and connective tissue (Dalakas et al., 1993). Immunopathologically, it was shown that IVIg inhibits the deposition of MAC on the endomysial capillaries by intercepting the incorporation of C 3 into the C 5 convertase assembly (Fig. 2), down-regulates the expression of the intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM-I) on the endomysial capillaries and the MHC-I antigen on muscle fibers, and reduces the expression of TGF-h 1 protein and mRNA in connective tissue (Dalakas et al., 1993;Basta & Dalakas, 1994;Dalakas, 1998a;Amemiya et al., 2000).

Maintenance and chronic use

The improvement in strength does not usually last more than 4 -8 weeks, and repeated infusions are required periodically to maintain response. Some of our originally treated patients, continue to respond to IVIg in conjunction with low-dose or no steroids; others have maintained normal strength without any drugs; and in some others the response is not as impressive as initially, presumably due to further progression of the disease or diminished response to IVIg therapy (Dalakas, 1998a).

Because DM responds to steroids, IVIg therapy is best reserved for steroid-resistant patients, for second-line addon therapy in patients who are not adequately controlled with combination of steroids and methotrexate or azathioprine, and for patients who are immunodeficient or in whom steroids and immunosuppressants are contraindicated.

Myasthenia gravis

MG is characterized by fluctuating weakness or fatigability of the extraocular, bulbar, respiratory, and limb muscles. Diplopia, dysphagia, and dysathria are common. Myasthenia is the prototypic autoimmune disease because (a) 2 antigens, the AChR or MuSK are known and can be detected and measured in the patients' serum; (b) the patients' IgG binds to the AChR at the postsynaptic region and, by fixing complement or cross-linking, results in internalization or degradation of the AChR and simplification of the postsynaptic junctional folds; (c) IgG antibodies are pathogenic because they transmit the disease to experimental animals and cause destruction of AChR in cultured myotubes; (d) immunization of healthy animals with AChR leads to MG that can be subsequently passed to other animals with purified IgG; and (e) removal of the pathogenic autoantibodies results in clinical improvement (Drachman, 1994;Hoch et al., 2001).

Patients with MG respond fairly well to the available therapies, such as anticholinesterases, thymectomy, steroids, azathioprine, cyclosporine, and plasmapheresis. The need for another effective immunomodulating therapy without long-term side effects has prompted experimentation with high-dose IVIg.

As reviewed previously (Dalakas, 1997a;Howard, 1998), to date, only 1 randomized study of IVIg has been published in patients with MG (Gajdos et al., 1997). In this study, 87 patients with MG exacerbation received either 3 courses of PE or IVIg 0.4 g/kg/day for 3 or 5 days. Efficacy, as measured by variation in myasthenic muscular score, was similar in the PE and IVIg groups, and anti-AChR antibody titers fell by about two-thirds in both groups among patients with detectable baseline levels. Interestingly, the 3-day IVIg regimen was slightly superior to the 5-day regimen, although methodological deficiencies limit rigorous comparison. A second large controlled study conducted in Europe has been recently announced. In this study, 173 patients were randomized to IVIg 1g/kg for 1 day versus 2 g/kg for 2 days (Gajdos, 2004). At day 15, the myasthenic scores improved equally in both groups concluding that IVIg is efficacious in MG but that there is no difference between 2 g/kg versus 1.0 g/kg.

From these data, along with other published series and our own observations, several conclusions can be drawn. First, the majority (probably as high as 75%) of patients with MG can respond to IVIg therapy (Dalakas, 1997a). The improvement is seen early, beginning after a mean period of 3 to 10 days lasting for a mean period of 30 days. Second, IVIg appears to be as effective as plasmapheresis, but for myasthenic crises, plasmapheresis is superior. Third, IVIg does not seem to work as fast as plasmapheresis. Fourth, there are patients with active disease who do not benefit from IVIg but improve only with plasmapheresis. At present and until further controlled trials are conducted, IVIg may be justified in lieu of plasmapheresis: (a) for acutely worsening disease to prevent or minimize impending bulbar or respiratory failure; (b) prepare a weak patient for thymectomy and (c) as adjuvant to immunosuppressive therapies and periodically (every 1 -3 months) to minimize the long-term side effects or stabilize a patient until immunosuppressants, such as azathioprine or cyclosporine, become effective (Dalakas, 1999b(Dalakas, , 2004a)).

Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome

Patients with LEMS have a presynaptic neuromuscular junction defect that results in proximal muscle weakness, oculomotor signs, and autonomic dysfunction. The symptoms are caused by antibodies against presynaptic voltagegated calcium channels resulting in decreased acetylcholine release. Patients respond to diaminopyridine, steroids, and azathioprine. Although IVIg is rarely needed, a controlled study has been conducted comparing IVIg to placebo. The IVIg-randomized patients showed a statistically significant increase in muscle strength compared with placebo, which peaked at 2 -4 weeks and declined by 8 weeks. The effectiveness of IVIg was associated with a statistically significant reduction of antibodies against voltage-gated calcium channel (Bain et al., 1996). IVIg is useful in difficult cases of LEMS, especially when steroids and azathioprine are not very effective or cause significant side effects.

Inclusion body myositis

Inclusion body myositis (IBM) is the most common acquired inflammatory myopathy in patients above the age of 50 years. The condition presents with selective atrophy of forearm flexor muscles, frequent falls, atrophy of the quadriceps muscles, and dysphagia. Immunopathologically, IBM is identical to polymyositis, characterized by sensitized, antigen-driven cytotoxic T-cells that invade MHC-I expressing muscle fibers (Dalakas, 1991;Dalakas & Hohlfeld, 2003). In contrast to PM, however, IBM is also associated with vacuolated fibers that contain amyloid deposits and remains resistant to most immunosuppressive medications. Therefore, the efficacy of IVIg was tested in 19 patients with IBM in a study designed similarly to the previously mentioned DM trial (Dalakas et al., 1997;Dalakas, 1998a). In the IVIg-treated group, there was an increase in muscle scores compared with placebo, but the differences were not statistically significant, perhaps because the study lacked sufficient power (Dalakas et al., 1997). Nonetheless, significant regional differences occurred in IVIg-treated patients, especially in the muscles used for swallowing. The duration of swallowing functions improved significantly in patients receiving IVIg compared with those receiving placebo ( P < 0.05). The mild benefits noted in certain muscle groups, prompted a larger study to investigate the potential synergistic effect of IVIg and prednisone (Dalakas et al., 2001b). Thirty-six patients with biopsy-confirmed IBM were randomized to IVIg 2.0 g/kg or placebo once a month for 3 months. Before infusions, all patients received prednisone (tapered from 60 mg/day). After 3 months of treatment, there was no significant difference in muscle strength score, between the IVIg-plus-prednisone and the placebo-plus-prednisone groups. Minor gains in strength that occurred in IVIg-treated patients were nonsignificant and unsustainable, and no changes in muscle cytoarchitecture or amyloid deposits were noted. A third trial showed similar results (Walter et al., 2000). In spite of these negative trials, it is our clinical impression that a few patients may show transient signs of improvement, which, although minor and difficult to capture with the methods used, can be clinically significant for the patients' activities and life styles, at least for a period. Whether such mild improvement in a small number of IBM patients justifies a 2-to 3-month trial with IVIg remains a matter of clinical judgment that should be viewed on an individual basis. When dysphagia is apparent, one may tilt toward using IVIg in view of the recently noted results (Cherin et al., 2002) that confirm our early observations from the controlled study that dysphagia may respond to IVIg for a period. Safety, age, economics, and the reminder that nothing else (including steroids) offers even minor clinical improvement to IBM patients should also be taken into account (Dalakas et al., 1998a).

Stiff-person syndrome

SPS is a disabling central nervous system disorder characterized by muscle rigidity, episodic muscle spasms, and high titers of antibodies against glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD65), the rate-limiting enzyme for synthesis of g-aminobutyric acid. Various other autoantibodies (e.g., anti-amphiphysin) are also present (Dalakas et al., 2000).

Drugs that enhance g-aminobutyric acid neurotransmission, such as diazepam, provide only mild to modest relief of clinical symptoms (Dalakas et al., 2000); however, treatment with IVIg confers substantial benefit. This improvement was documented in a placebo-controlled crossover study in 16 patients administered IVIg 2.0 g/ kg or placebo once a month for 3 months (Dalakas et al., 2001a). Efficacy was assessed with the use of an objective distribution-of-stiffness index and heightenedsensitivity scale. Among patients initially treated with IVIg, stiffness scores decreased significantly ( P = 0.02) and heightened-sensitivity scores declined markedly, but they rebounded during placebo administration; the opposite pattern occurred among those treated with placebo first. Eleven patients who received IVIg were able to walk more easily or without assistance and to perform work-related or household tasks and their frequency of falls decreased. The study convincingly showed that IVIg is effective as supplementary therapy in patients with SPS.

Treatment considerations

The therapeutic dose of IVIg is empirically set at 2 g/ kg. Although past practice has been to divide the total dose for infusion into 5 daily doses of 400 mg/kg each, the preference now is to divide the total dose into 2 daily doses of 1 g/kg each especially in younger patients who have normal renal and cardiovascular function (Dalakas, 1999b). In our experience, the 2-day infusion is not associated with more adverse reactions than the 5-day infusion. The rate of infusion should not exceed 200 ml/hr or 0.08 ml/kg/min. Considering the drug's rapid diffusion to the extravascular space, achieving a high concentration of IVIg within 2 days may enhance its efficacy. Experimental studies, both in vitro and in vivo suggest a superior effect on cytokine neutralization, Fc receptor manipulation (Kurlander & Hall, 1986), and inhibition of C 3 fragments (Basta et al., 1989) when IVIg concentrations equivalent to 2 g/kg were given in a bolus infusion rather than in divided doses. In children with Kawasaki syndrome, a single, large, 2-g/kg dose of IVIg given in a 10-hr infusion was more effective than 4 daily infusions of 400 mg/kg each (Newburger et al., 1991). Similar experience was noted in children with GBS (Kanra et al., 1997).

Adverse reactions and risk factors

In general, adverse reactions to IVIg therapy are usually minor and occur in no more than 10% of the patients (Dalakas, 1997c(Dalakas, , 1999b;;Bertorini et al., 1996;Brannagan et al., 1996). Mild to moderate headache, which responds to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications, is common. Chills, myalgia, or chest discomfort may develop in the first hour of the infusion and usually responds to stopping the infusion for 30 min and resuming it at a slower rate. Postinfusion fatigue, fever, or nausea may occur and last for up to 24 hr. The cause of these reactions is unclear, but activation of complement by aggregated immunoglobulin molecules or various stabilizing agents in the IVIg preparation have been implicated (Dwyer, 1992;Dalakas et al., 1999b). A slow rate of infusion is advisable in patients with a compromised cardiovascular system or congestive heart failure to avoid rapid fluid overload.

Serum viscosity and thromboembolic events

IVIg therapy causes an increase in serum viscosity, up to 0.5 cp, and in patients with high-normal or slightly elevated serum viscosity, such as those with cryoglobulinemia, hypercholesterolemia, or hypergammaglobulinemia, the viscosity level increases even further (Dalakas, 1994). Serum viscosity greater than 2.5 cp (normal, 1.2 -1.8 cp) increases the risk of thromboembolic events and probably accounts for rare cases of stroke, pulmonary embolism, or myocardial infarction after IVIg treatment (Woodruff et al., 1986, Hague et al., 1990;Silbert et al., 1992;Dalakas, 1994;Schiff, 1994;Steg & Lefkowitz, 1994;Dalakas & Clark, 2003). Patients with recent deep vein thrombosis, or immobilized patients who are at higher risk of having a subclinical thrombosis, may be more prone for developing a thromboembolic event after IVIg. In such patients, prudence in justifying the use of IVIg, screening the legs with an ultrasound for subclinical clots, and very slow infusion rate are recommended. Whether low-dose heparin or anti-platelet agents can prevent thromboembolic events in such patients is uncertain. IVIg therapy can also induce a hyperviscosity syndrome in children with HIV infection who have high pretreatment levels of serum immunoglobulins (Hague et al., 1990). A reversible cerebral vasospasm has also been noted (Voltz et al., 1996).

Migraine headache

In patients with a history of migraine, IVIg therapy may trigger a migraine attack, which can be prevented by pretreatment with propranolol (Constantinescu et al., 1993). The occurrence of aseptic meningitis, discussed below, is also high in patients with migraine (Sekul et al., 1994). IVIg therapy has been associated with a stroke in a young woman with a history of migraine (Steg & Lefkowitz, 1994).

Aseptic meningitis

Aseptic meningitis develops in some patients treated with IVIg. Its occurrence is unrelated to the proprietary product, the rate of infusion, or the underlying disease (Sekul et al., 1994;Dalakas, 1995Dalakas, , 1997c)). Prophylaxis with intravenous steroids is often ineffective. The symptoms respond to strong analgesia and subside in 24 -48 hr. Additional diagnostic testing is rarely necessary (Dalakas, 1995(Dalakas, , 1997c)).

Skin reactions

Skin reactions to IVIg therapy, although rare, can develop 2-5 days after the infusions and may last up to 30 days. They include urticaria, lichenoid cutaneous lesions, pruritus of the palms, and petechiae of the extremities (Dalakas, 1997c(Dalakas, , 1999b)). Skin reactions, associated with various lots of IVIg, have occurred in 7 of the 120 patients we have treated (Dalakas, 1997c(Dalakas, , 1999b)).

Severe anaphylactic reaction

A severe anaphylactic reaction may occur in patients with an absence or severe deficiency of IgA. Selective IgA deficiency is common (prevalence about 1:1000), but asymptomatic. About 29% of these individuals have anti-IgA antibodies that do not necessarily predict the development of adverse reactions (Burks et al., 1986). When these patients receive IVIg, the small amount of IgA present with the IVIg may lead to anaphylactic reaction due to formation of macromolecular complexes between infused IgA and circulating anti-IgA antibodies. The reaction is rare and occurs mostly in patients with common variable immunodeficiency (Bjo ¨rkander et al., 1987).

Renal tubular necrosis

Acute renal tubular necrosis, mostly reversible, occurs rarely with IVIg therapy in patients who have preexisting kidney disease and volume depletion, especially the elderly and those with diabetes or poor hydration (Ellie et al., 1992). It is usually reversible, but rare fatalities have been noted (Ahsan et al., 1994;Ahsan, 1998). Serum creatinine may rise 1-10 days of the infusion but returns to baseline within 2 -60 days of discontinuation (Ahsan, 1998). This complication has often, but not exclusively, been associated with the high concentration of sucrose in some proprietary IVIg products (Ahsan et al., 1994). Osmotically induced tubular injury and vacuolization are the common histopathological findings upon renal biopsy (Ahsan, 1998). Identical osmotic tubular nephrosis is caused by intravenous solutions containing a concentration of hypertonic sucrose similar to that of IVIg (Ahsan et al., 1994). Diluting the IVIg preparation, slowing the rate of infusion, or selecting products with low osmolality minimizes the risk. In patients with preexisting kidney disease, if there is no alternate therapy to IVIg treatment, close monitoring of creatinine and BUN are essential.

Spurious results on serological tests

After IVIg therapy, the erythrocyte sedimentation rate increases 6-fold or more (Koffman & Dalakas, 1997), probably as the result of enhanced rouleaux formation and reduced surface area caused by the infused g-globulin (Dalakas, 1999b). This increase can persist for 2-3 weeks and should not be considered a sign of a developing vasculitis. We have also observed hyponatremia, with sodium concentrations as low as 130 mg/l (normal, 135 -145 mg/l), after IVIg therapy, but not after placebo use (Koffman & Dalakas, 1997). Hyponatremia appears to be related to the assay method used to measure Na + because additional dilution of the sample is required owing to the high serum protein concentration that follows IVIg infusion.

Conclusion

IVIg is used in the treatment of a wide range of immunologic diseases that affect the entire neuroaxis, including the brain, spinal cord, peripheral nerves, neuromuscular junction, and muscles. Based on findings from controlled clinical trials, IVIg is the treatment of choice for GBS, MMN, and CIDP. In addition, IVIg is useful instead of plasmapheresis in MG crisis. Evidence also supports the use of IVIg in DM, especially aggressive or treatment-resistant forms of the disease. Patients with SPS also respond well to IVIg therapy. Occasional patients with IBM may derive modest but transient benefit sufficient to justify a trial of IVIg, especially when dysphagia is present, but the majority of patients do not respond.

In sum, therapy with IVIg is effective for an array of autoimmune neurologic diseases, but its spectrum of efficacy especially as first-line therapy has not been fully established. Further controlled studies are needed to improve the evidence base for clinical practice and to evaluate the use of IVIg in conditions for which its efficacy is suspected but not proved. The dose needed for maintenance therapy, the frequency of administration, and the effect of IVIg when combined with other therapies remain to be established.

of T-cell function (a) GBS, (b) CIDP, (c) inflammatory myopathies 6. Possible effect on remyelination (a) GBS, (b) CIDP

Fig. 1 .1Fig. 1. (A) Main immunopathogenetic networks involved in autoimmune neurological disorders of the peripheral and the central nervous systems. After a putative infection, tolerance is broken and the putative antigen is presented to the antigen-presenting cells, such as macrophages (Mf), which via costimulatory molecules lead to clonal expansion of T-cells, release of cytokines and chemokines, up-regulation of adhesion molecules (ICAM, VCAM, and MMP) on endothelial cells, and transmigration of T-cells to targeted tissues. Resident macrophages activated by cytokines invade via their Fc receptors the target tissue (e.g. myelin, muscle) or release injurious molecules (e.g., IFN-g, IL-2, TNF-a). Antibodies, produced by IL-4-and IL-6-stimulated B-cell clones, may cause myelin damage by activating the complement system and assembling the MAC or via binding to the Fc receptors of activated macrophages. (B) Targets of action of IVIg. IVIg effects include (1) interference with co-stimulatory molecules; (2) provision of anti-idiotypic antibodies or suppression of antibody production; (3) interference with the activation of complement and interception of MAC formation; (4) modulation of the expression and function of Fc receptors on macrophages; (5) suppression of cytokines, (6) chemokines, and (7) adhesion molecules; and alterations of the activation, differentiation, and effector functions of T-cells. B = B cell; BBB = blood-brain barrier; BNB = blood-nerve barrier; C 3 = complement 3; ICAM = intercellular adhesion molecule; IFN-g = interferon gamma; Igs = immunoglobulins; IL = interleukin; Mf = macrophages; MHC = major histocompatibility complex; MMP = matrix metalloproteinase; T = T-cell; TCR = T-cell receptor; TNF-a = tumor necrosis factor alpha; VCAM = vascular adhesion molecule.

