Polymyositis: An overdiagnosed entity

To the Editor: The classification of the inflammatory and immune myopathies is a complex issue. While the Bohan and Peter criteria 1 have been used for almost 30 years, recent findings have brought their validity into question. For this reason, we read with interest the study by van der Meulen et al. 2  describing a new pathology-driven categorization of these diseases. A biopsy-based approach, however, is not necessarily straightforward. Because the pathology of the inflammatory myopathies is not always homogeneous, such an approach requires extensive study to determine which pathologic criteria are useful and reproducible for the diagnoses of different immune and inflammatory myopathic syndromes.

A shortcoming of the van der Meulen et al. study is the lack of evidence to suggest that their criteria perform any better than the Bohan and Peter criteria in determining diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis. Their new scheme results in polymyositis being condemned to an uncertain status and being replaced with the lessthan-helpful categories of "unspecified myositis" and "possible myositis." The authors' arguments would be more compelling if they demonstrated that their proposed classifications were more clinically useful than prior ones (i.e., that patients initially classified as polymyositis or dermatomyositis by Bohan and Peter criteria and who did not respond to treatment met their criteria for unspecified myositis). Their proposed classification criteria would leave many myositis patients diagnostically adrift and potentially excluded from receiving effective treatment.

The International Myositis Assessment and Clinical Studies Group (IMACS) is a multidisciplinary coalition of over 100 neurologists, rheumatologists, dermatologists, and other specialists who care for adults and children with inflammatory myopathies. Currently, the IMACS consensus is that probable or definite Bohan and Peter criteria are appropriate for distinguishing polymyositis from dermatomyositis and enrolling adult subjects in trials as long as the muscle biopsy criteria are met. Bohan and Peter criteria actually incorporate the exclusion of other diagnoses, 1 which today include pathologic, genetic, or other studies in cases suggestive of inclusion body, hereditary, or other myopathies.

We agree with the conclusion of the accompanying editorial 3 : prospective studies, using up-to-date comprehensive evaluations, including pathology, are needed to redefine the immune myopathies and related systemic disorders in clinically useful ways to address their diagnosis, incidence, associated features, and prognosis. To this end, we encourage more research in this area. We hope that other neurologists will join or collaborate with IMACS so that together we can move forward in improving the diagnosis and treatment of these syndromes.

To the Editor: van der Meulen et al. 2 reported a retrospective analysis of 165 cases of inflammatory myopathy collected in the Netherlands from 1977 to 1998, and concluded that the application of the criteria of Bohan and Peter 1 leads to overdiagnosis of polymyositis. They applied the criterion of Arahata and Engel, 4 namely inflammatory cells infiltrating non-necrotic muscle fibers, as the hallmark of polymyositis or sporadic inclusion body myositis [sIBM]. They accepted the diagnosis of dermatomyositis with either typical skin changes or perifascicular muscle atrophy. If these criteria were not met, van der Meulen et al. diagnosed either unspecific or possible myositis.

It is worth comparing their study with the very similar retrospective analysis we published in 1975 5 before the publication by Arahata and Engel 4 and the current epidemic of sIBM. We required for the diagnosis of what is now more generically termed inflammatory myopathy a typical clinical picture supported by typical findings on muscle biopsy, EMG, and/or serum creatine kinase analysis. We showed that the patchy nature of the disease process resulted in not every laboratory abnormality being present in every patient. This point was not emphasized by van der Meulen et al. 2 Overall, van der Meulen et al. 2 found a very similar proportion of cases with malignancy (8%) and connective tissue disease (27%) as we did. However, their higher frequency of dermatomyositis can be explained by their inclusion of patients simply with perifascicular atrophy. Recalculation of the data of DeVere and Bradley 5 according to the criteria advanced by van der Meulen et al. 2 indicates that their experience is in fact similar to ours (table). van der Meulen et al. 2 did not provide data on the severity of disease or change with treatment in their patients. In our earlier series, at presentation the average patient was unable to climb stairs, and by 5 years had returned to no functional impairment. 5 van der Meulen et al. 2 report that five out of nine of their patients with polymyositis later developed probable sIBM. We have seen cases of polymyositis and dermatomyositis progress from treatmentresponsive myositis to typical sIBM.

Case 1: A 45-year-old man with difficulty climbing stairs had MRC4-power in the quadriceps, and 5-in the biceps and tibialis anterior. The sedimentation rate was 60 mm/1 hour, the serum CK was three times normal, the EMG and quadriceps muscle biopsy showed typical inflammatory myopathy. Treatment with high dose prednisone and methotrexate improved the arm strength to normal and the quadriceps to MRC5-. By age 50, after 5 years of stability on treatment, the quadriceps began to deteriorate to MRC3-, and he developed the typical finger flexor weakness of sIBM. Muscle weakness progressed to the age of 58, still with some response to prednisone, and he developed a painful peripheral neuropathy.

Case 2: A 48-year-old woman with difficulty climbing stairs had proximal upper and lower limb weakness, normal sedimentation rate, and a serum CK of five times normal. Quadriceps muscle biopsy showed typical inflammatory myopathy, and the weakness cleared with high-dose prednisone and methotrexate. At age 53 she developed a skin rash typical of dermatomyositis. Muscle weakness relapsed whenever the immunosuppressant therapy was reduced. At age 58 she developed progressive proximal weakness in the upper and lower limb partially unresponsive to increased immunosuppressant therapy. At age 61 she developed the typical finger flexor muscle weakness of sIBM, and quadriceps and biceps muscle biopsies showed the typical changes of sIBM.

I believe that van der Meulen et al. 2 are incorrect in concluding that polymyositis is overdiagnosed. It would be more correct to conclude that infiltration of non-necrotic muscle fibers by mononuclear cells is present in only a minority of biopsies of inflammatory myopathy, and that this criterion should not be used as a requisite for diagnosing polymyositis.

Walter G. Bradley, DM, FRCP, Miami, FL

To the Editor: We read the article by van der Meulen et al. 2 with great interest. The authors state that polymyositis is an overdiagnosed entity. There are several concerns that need to be addressed.

First, the authors formulate their own diagnostic criteria for dermatomyositis and polymyositis. These criteria are strongly based on the criteria presented by Dalakas. 6 The Dalakas criteria have never been validated, unlike other criteria for which specificity and sensitivity are known. 7 Based on the results of their study, the authors conclude that polymyositis is an overdiagnosed entity. However, the correct conclusion should be that the authors' diagnostic criteria for polymyositis are too rigid with an extremely low sensitivity. It is not the diagnosis that should be questioned but the diagnostic criteria used.

Second, the authors stress the importance of histopathologic features for the diagnosis of dermatomyositis or polymyositis. There is, however, no gold standard for the diagnosis dermatomyositis or polymyositis, not even the histopathology that is illustrated by the editorial accompanying the article. 3 The diagnosis of dermatomyositis or polymyositis cannot be made based on histopathology alone, but should always include the clinical signs and symptoms and results of other additional investigations.

Third, the authors state that the presence of endomysial inflammatory infiltrates with invasion of non-necrotic muscle fibers has been observed in polymyositis and that this feature should be included in the diagnostic criteria. They then review all their myositis cases and observe that these features are rarely encountered and that nearly all cases in which these features are present are atypical steroid-resistant polymyositis patients-in other words, probable IBM patients. What were the clinical characteristics of the "polymyositis" patients in which the initial histologic observation was made?

Next, the medical scientific concept of a diagnosis exists for more than one reason. It is important for pathogenetic investigations and therapeutic intervention studies, but is also important for the clinical treatment of the individual patient. The clinical diagnosis serves as a guide to treatment and prognosis, and it is in this form that the diagnosis polymyositis serves us very well. Finally, the authors cite us erroneously. They state that myositis specific autoantibodies (MSAs) are not useful in differentiating the myositis subtypes, including IBM. They cite our recent article in which we conclude that MSAs can aid in the differential diagnosis of the myositis subtypes by virtually excluding IBM. 8 This conclusion is clearly reflected in the subtitle of the article.

Nevertheless, we would like to thank the authors for their time-consuming effort and for reminding us again of the importance of valid definitions of disease entities. Unicorns and dragons are mythological, but the problem with this study and polymyositis is methodological. Gerald J.D. Hengstman, MD, Baziel G.M. van Engelen, MD, PhD, Nijmegen, The Netherlands Reply from the Authors: We thank Drs. Miller et al., Bradley, and Hengstman and van Engelen for their interest in our study. 2 We would like to emphasize that the aim of our study was to investigate the applicability of generally accepted criteria for diagnosing polymyositis and dermatomyositis, not to validate a new classification. Applying Bohan and Peter's criteria, all patients with an inflammatory myopathy who do not have a rash are designated as polymyositis, if other myopathies, currently also IBM, are excluded. 1 We also took into account the specified muscle biopsy findings. Very few of Bohan and Peter's polymyositis patients showed mononuclear cells surrounding and invading normal muscle fibers, designating them as polymyositis histopathologically. 4 In our material, the majority of Bohan and Peter's polymyositis patients showed either nonspecific perimysial/perivascular cell infiltrates or a necrotizing myopathy without inflammation. The different biopsy findings reflect pathogenetic heterogeneity of the clinical syndrome of polymyositis. Disregarding this would be a missed opportunity: acknowledging the differences in biopsy findings in patients with Bohan and Peter's polymyositis is necessary for further investigation into pathogenesis and targeted treatments.

Dr. Bradley's cases contribute nicely to the discussion. Case 2 is remarkable because of the initial effect of immunosuppressive treatment. Case 1 would have been excluded from our study because of suspected IBM at onset. Our approach will not result in withholding treatment to patients as suggested by Miller et al. On the contrary, our findings emphasize that a necrotizing myopathy may be immunemediated, responding well to immunosuppressive treatment.

We 

Unicorns, dragons, polymyositis, and other mythical beasts

To the Editor: In the Amato et al. editorial on myositis, 1 the authors are concerned with diagnostic criteria. We agree that it is important to have pathologic diagnostic criteria distinguishing sIBM from "polymyositis" and other muscle disorders having mononuclear-cell inflammation in muscle biopsies. In fact, such diagnostic criteria have been reported [2][3][4][5] and are being used. For example, in the presence of inflammation, the unique degenerative aspects of sIBM muscle fibers provide excellent criteria distinguishing sIBM from myositides. Those aspects include the following:

1) Intra-muscle-fiber amyloid inclusions, 2 representing both amyloid-␤ (A␤) and phosphorylated tau containing inclusions, 3 which are a) congophilic and anisotropically greenish in polarized light with Congo red staining (but this might not be specific in overstained preparations) 2,4 and b) metachromatically red with crystal-violet staining. 3,4 However, the amyloid aspect of those inclusions is best and most specifically shown when Congo red fluorescence is visualized through Texas-Red fluorescence filters 4 (figure , A).

2) Intra-muscle-fiber inclusions immunoreactive with a) the monoclonal antibody SMI-31, which recognizes phosphorylated tau of sIBM paired helical filaments 5 (figure, B), or b) antibodies against ubiquitin, which label both AB inclusions and sIBM paired helical filaments. 3 These stainings when positive, and they nearly always are in sIBM, are of excellent diagnostic value. They have been proven in several laboratories to identify sIBM, since sIBM characteristic inclusions do not occur in any other muscle disease with inflammation. The wider use of these easy to perform reactions should result in fewer missed diagnoses of sIBM. (Note: or myotonic discharges on electromyography that should lead to the consideration of proximal myotonic dystrophy? Moreover, polymyositis cannot be diagnosed on biopsy since endomysial inflammation and invasion of non-necrotic fibers is nonspecific. Rimmed vacuoles and inclusions are not found in as many as 20 to 30% of initial IBM biopsies. Therefore, IBM cannot be excluded by histopathology alone. While we agree with van der Meulen et al that polymyositis as defined by Dalakas and Hohlfeld 8 and the ENMC 9 is rare, we concluded that prospective studies with comprehensive evaluations including detailed immunopathology are needed to determine the incidence, natural history, and treatment for all inflammatory myopathies-including the overdiagnosed and illdefined disorder of polymyositis.

Finally, we agree with Askanas and Engel that sIBM can now be diagnosed with much greater accuracy with the new approaches that they and others have developed.  

Anthony A. Amato, MD, Boston, MA; Robert C. Griggs, MD, Rochester, NY Copyright © 2004 by AAN Enterprises, Inc.

Figure ..Figure. Light microscopic diagnostic features of sporadic inclusion-body myositis (sIBM) muscle fibers. (A) Congored staining fluorescence, visualized through Texas-red filters and epifluorescence illumination, shows multiple amyloid deposits within abnormal muscle fibers. (B) Characteristic large irregular, squiggly and dotty inclusionsdarkly stained with SMI-31 antibody, in two abnormal muscle fibers. The section is counter stained with hematoxylin and eosin. A, B, x 1,500. (Neither figure is computer enhanced.)

applaud Miller et al.'s intention to collaborate with neurologists closely. A joint meeting on trial design in idiopathic inflammatory myopathies, held under the auspices of the European Neuromuscular Centre on October 10 -12, 2003, has shown to be enlightening and constructive. 9 M.F.G. van der Meulen, MD, I.M. Bronner, MD, J.E. Hoogendijk, MD, PhD, H. Burger, MD, PhD, W. van Venrooij, PhD, A.E. Voskuyl, MD, PhD, H.J. Dinant, MD, PhD, W.H.J.P. Linssen, MD, PhD, J.H.J. Wokke, MD, PhD, M. de Visser, MD, PhD, Utrecht, The Netherlands Copyright © 2004 by AAN Enterprises, Inc.

TableComparison of the findings of DeVere and Bradley5  with those of van der Meulen et al.2    We anticipated that the article by van der Meulen et al. and our editorial would prompt discussion.1,6  The Bohan and Peter 1975 criteria were of value.7  However, advances in our understanding of the pathogenesis of the major types of inflammatory myopathy (polymyositis, dermatomyositis, and IBM) have made their criteria less useful 8 since they are nonspecific, including the histopathologic criteria. Dalakas and Hohlfeld 8 and the European Neuromuscular Centre9  proposed classification schemes that employ updated immunohistopathologic criteria. The Bohan and Peter criteria do not exclude the diagnosis of IBM. Despite the belief that Bohan and Peter criteria now encompass IBM (as well as dystrophies with inflammation), these disorders are often not excluded in practice. Many IBM patients erroneously diagnosed with polymyositis are given chronic immunosuppressive therapies (with adverse side effects). Our editorial emphasizes that a good clinical examination is paramount prior to making a diagnosis of polymyositis. Does the patient have early weakness in the wrist or finger/thumb flexors, quadriceps, or tibialis anterior muscles, asymmetric weakness, normal or only slightly elevated serum creatine kinase level, or onset over 50 years of age that would suggest IBM? Does he or she have scapular winging that would suggest limb-girdle or facioscapulohumeral dystrophy or calf atrophy associated with loss of the ankle jerk and markedly elevated serum CK that would imply a dysferlinopathy? Does he or she have clinical myotonia in proximal muscles"amyloid" indicates a physical, beta-pleated-sheet configuration,which is an alternate conformation [unfolding/misfolding] andauto-assembly that various proteins can undergo; howevervan der "amyloid-␤" is a specific protein accumulated intracellularly DeVere andMeulen et al. within sIBM muscle fibers and abundantly extracellularly in Alz-Bradley heimer disease brains, which may exist in amyloid and non-amyloid forms 3 .)n%n%Valerie Askanas, MD, PhD, W. King Engel, MD, Los Angeles, CADermatomyositis48/1603021/11818Inflammatory myopathy with Reply from the Authors:43/1602724/118*20connective tissue diseaseInflammatory myopathy with13/16083/118 †3malignancyPolymyositis §56/1603570/118 ‡59* Excluding nine cases of dermatomyositis.† Excluding six cases of dermatomyositis.‡ Excluding nine cases of dermatomyositis.§ For the van der Meulen et al. 2 series including cases diagnosedas polymyositis, unspecific myositis, and possible myositis.

