The future prospects in the classification, diagnosis and therapies of inflammatory myopathies: A view to the future from the “bench-to-bedside”

Introduction

During the last decade there has been remarkable progress in the understanding of immunopathogenesis of inflammatory myopathies that has laid grounds for more effective therapeutic interventions. A number of issues, however, remain still unsettled. As we look into the future, the prospects of resolving fundamental concerns in reference to diagnosis, pathogenesis and management appear promising. I will review here how I see the future of the inflammatory myopathies from the "bench-to-bedside".

■ Classification, epidemiology and diagnostic criteria:

The present

As viewed today, the inflammatory myopathies comprise three major and distinct subsets: dermatomyositis (DM), polymyositis (PM), and sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM) (Table ). All three have in common the presence of moderate to severe muscle weakness and endomysial inflammation, but each subset retains characteristic clinical, immunopathologic and morphologic features [1,2]. Dermatomyositis is a distinct disease that affects muscle and skin. Involvement of the muscle results in mild to severe myopathy; involvement of the skin causes a heliotropic rash on the face and knuckles, and a flat-red rash on the trunk, knees, neck, chest and back.When the muscle strength is normal, the term Dermatomyositis sine myositis is used even though muscle biopsy shows the same changes as in patients with clinical signs of myositis.Cases of Dermatomyositis sine dermatitis also exist when the rash is subtle or transient; in -Subsets: a) Dermatomyositis sine myositis when the skin is predominantly affected b) Dermatomyositis sine dermatitis when the skin involvement is subtle and presents as PM 2. Polymyositis (PM) -It is a rare disease as a stand-alone entity -Affects proximal muscles, evolves subacutely, and remains a diagnosis of exclusion in a patient who does not have: a) family history; b) exposure to myotoxic drugs or toxins; c) another acquired muscle disease caused by endocrine, metabolic or neurogenic causes; d) certain sporadically occurring dystrophies (dystrophinopathies, sarcoglycanopathies, dysferlinopathies); and e) Inclusion Body Myositis.

Inclusion Body Myositis and Myopathies

-Affect concurrently proximal and distal muscles and evolve slowly (over years). -Subtypes: a) Sporadic Inclusion Body Myositis (s-IBM): an inflammatory vacuolar myositis with a distinct clinical phenotype b) Familial (inflammatory) Inclusion Body Myositis (f-IBM): an inflammatory vacuolar myositis with a phenotype identical to s-IBM occurring in family members of the same generation c) Retroviral-Associated IBM: occurring in HIV or HTLV-I-infected patients d) Hereditary, non inflammatory, Inclusion Body Myopathy (h-IBM): a heterogeneous group of slowly progressive myopathies. Patients with recessive inheritance, quadriceps sparing and mutations in the GNE gene, represent a distinct subset.

such cases, the patients present as PM but the biopsy specimen shows features characteristic of DM [2].

Polymyositis remains a challenge in definition and diagnosis. It is a diagnosis of exclusion and must be considered in every patient with acquired myopathy of subacute onset who does not have a family history, exposure to myotoxic drugs or toxins, another acquired muscle disease caused by endocrine, metabolic or neurogenic causes, IBM or a dystrophy (Table ). Exclusion of the last two conditions is essential because they account for the majority of patients with erroneous diagnosis of PM. Polymyositis is more often associated with various autoimmune disorders, immunodeficiencies, connective tissue diseases or viral infections, but as a stand-alone clinical entity is a rare disease. Some authors doubt even its existence [3]. Although this is an extreme view, I believe that PM exists but it is rare and over-diagnosed.

Inclusion-Body Myositis (IBM) is the commonest inflammatory myopathy in patients above the age of 50 [1,[4][5][6]. Although it is commonly suspected when a patient with presumed PM does not respond to therapy, slow disease onset and progression and early involvement of finger flexors or the quadriceps muscles are clues to clinical diagnosis [1,5]. Four distinct subsets of IBM have now been recognized (Table ): a) sporadic IBM (s-IBM), an inflammatory vacuolar myositis with the distinct clinical phenotype described above; b) familial inflammatory IBM, an inflammatory vacuolar myositis occurring in several family members of the same generation with clinical and histological phenotype identical to s-IBM [7]; c) retroviral-associated IBM, seen in patients with HIV or HTLV-1 infection [8]; and d) hereditary inclusion body myopathy, a group of non-inflammatory vacuolar myopathies of recessive or dominant inheritance [4,9]. The recessive disease, characterized by quadriceps sparing, originally described in Iranian Jews but now identified in many ethnic groups [9], is due to mutations in the GNE gene [10].

Future prospects in establishing accurate diagnostic tools, clarifying the specificity of endomysial inflammation and revisiting the epidemiology and classification

While the diagnosis of DM is not overall difficult owing to the skin rash, the diagnosis of PM is not straightforward. The typical IBM is also not difficult to diagnose because of its distinct clinical and histological phenotype, although atypical cases still pose diagnostic difficulties and dilemmas [11]. The old criteria of Peter and Behan proposed in 1975 [12] have served the community well for years but cannot exclude many of the conditions that present as PM (Table ), hence the need for new criteria as introduced in 1991 [1] and revised recently [2]). Nevertheless, prospective studies are essen-tial and needed to address the incidence, diagnosis, associated conditions and histopathology.

Although the muscle biopsy remains the gold standard for the diagnosis of PM and IBM, sometimes it cannot reliably separate these disorders from some toxic, necrotizing, viral or dystrophic myopathies, hence the need for additional data. The assumption that DM is a PM without a rash and IBM is a PM without vacuoles and inclusions is often simplistic or erroneous. The histology of DM remains unique because the combination of perivascular inflammation, obliteration of endomysial capillaries, muscle fiber necrosis prominent at the periphery of the fascicle, and perifascicular atrophy are not seen in any other disorder [1,2,13]. In PM and IBM, however, the histology needs special attention and requires help from new molecular techniques because several of the histological features lack specificity. The typical inflammation in PM and IBM consists of CD 8 + T cells that invade non-necrotic, MHC-I class-expressing muscle fibers resulting in phagocytosis and muscle fiber necrosis [1,13]. In s-IBM, in addition to the inflammation, there are red-rimmed vacuoles and tiny deposits of Congo-red-positive amyloid that immunoreact for βamyloid and other related proteins such as tau,APO-E or chymotrypsin [6,14]. These features are not, however, unique to PM or IBM. At one extreme, inflammation is prominent not only in PM and s-IBM but also in certain sporadically occurring dystrophies such as Duchenne, Becker's, facioscapulohumeral, scapulohumeroperoneal, oculopharyngeal and dysferlinopathies [2,15]. At the other extreme, minimal or no inflammation may also be seen in the biopsy specimens of patients who fulfill the clinical inclusion and exclusion criteria for PM or IBM, as mentioned earlier (see also Table ). A major advance in establishing specificity of the inflammation has been the presence of MHC-I/CD8 complex, which has now emerged as a characteristic immune/inflammatory lesion specific for patients with PM and IBM, but not for other myopathic or dystrophic conditions, as recently emphasized [2]. However, additional inflammatory markers based on T cell Receptor profile, co-stimulatory molecules or other inflammatory mediations need to be established. Similar concerns apply for the vacuoles and inclusions which are prominent not only in many other myopathies but also in chronic neurogenic conditions such as old polio [16]). Markers unique for the vacuoles of IBM, not seen in other dystrophic myopathies, are clearly needed. Deficiencies of gene products such as dystrophin, sarcoglycans, calpain, dysferlin, sialuria or caveolin that characterize certain well-defined dystrophies with vacuoles or inflammation, need to be excluded when it comes to the differential diagnosis of PM or IBM.

Consequently, I envision that in the near future gene expression profiling and proteomics of the muscle tissue will supplement or even replace the immunocytochem-istry in arriving at a correct diagnosis or accomplishing a more accurate classification. I am confident that gene and proteome profile analysis of the muscle tissue will become fundamental as the only means to accurately separate the primary inflammatory myopathies from genetic or toxic muscle disorders. Search for markers of inflammatory mediators, T cell receptor analysis, transcription factors associated with inflammation, muscle regeneration, and muscle fiber necrosis or apoptosis [4] will identify the molecular blueprints that characterize each condition. In IBM, identification of molecules seen early in the disease process may provide the answer as to how the disease begins: with inflammation, as a primary immune disorder, or with alien protein accumulations within the inclusions as in neurodegenerative processes. A century ago, the diagnosis of PM and DM, was based on routine histology on paraffin sections; from the late 1960s it was replaced by enzyme histochemistry that helped to identify IBM and exclude metabolic disorders; since the late 1990s it has been supplemented by immunocytochemistry; in the years to come, I predict that molecular profiling of the tissue using genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics may surpass, supplement or even replace the old diagnostic tools.

Another diagnostic challenge that the future would solve is the identification of necrotizing myopathy which is so often misdiagnosed as PM or IBM. Necrotizing myopathy is not PM and does not adequately respond to therapies. While PM is characterized by the MHC-I/CD 8 lesion, necrotizing myopathy is mediated by macrophages and very few CD 8 + T cells. At present, immunocytochemical studies are needed to search for the MHC/CD 8 lesion and exclude defects in the cytoskeletal or membrane proteins but we are far from arriving safely at the diagnosis in many of these disorders. Further, we are still missing the cause of most necrotizing myopathies, whether viral, immune or toxic in origin. I envision that molecular profiling will provide the footprints needed to identify their cause or at least separate them clearly from PM, DM or IBM in all age groups.

Still another tool that I envision will be utilized in the future as an aid to the diagnosis and classification of PM, DM and IBM is muscle imaging. New molecular imaging techniques applied to muscle could supplement the information from gene profiling. Advances in MRI, MRS and contrast media should help us identify the different subsets of PM, DM and IBM, much like MRI imaging has done in MS. I also envision imaging techniques that could accurately identify tissue fibrosis, muscle edema, calcifications or involvement of the fascia. Mapping the muscle lesions may provide accurate and specific patterns for each disease and serve as a biomarker to follow the disease longitudinally and quantify response to therapies.

Immunopathogenesis:

What the future should tell us

■ Dermatomyositis

In DM the disease appears to begin with activation of the complement that forms C3b and C4b fragments which lead to the formation and deposition of Membranolytic Attack (MAC) on the endomysial microvasculature [2,13]. The deposition of MAC causes osmotic lysis of the endothelial cells, capillary necrosis, ischemia, microinfarcts, inflammation, endofascicular hypoperfusion and finally perifascicular atrophy [2,13]. Cytokines induced by activation of complement upregulate the expression of adhesion molecules and integrins on leucocytes and their respective ligands on the endothelial cells and facilitate the transmigration of activated cells to the muscle [2,13]. The inflammatory cells in the perimysial and perivascular regions are mostly B cells and CD 4 + cells, suggesting involvement of humoral mediated mechanisms [2,13,17]. Although these immunopathological events are compelling, a number of uncertainties exist, as previously discussed [18]. I envision that the future will clarify a number of the missing immune factors and help us identify the following: a) what triggers complement activation? b) do the endomysial B cells produce antibodies in situ which are targeted against specific antigens on muscle endothelial cells or capillary membranes? if so, what are the antigenic determinants? c) is there a role for T cell mediated cytotoxicity? d) do the triggering agents recognize common antigens in skin and muscle that could explain their concurrent involvement? e) do inflammatory mediators [cytokines, TGF-β, other] drive the excessive fibrosis in the disease? f) is there a role for upregulated extracellular matrix factors in triggering calcinosis? and g) is there molecular mimicry between cancer and muscle antigens that could explain the paradox, but also the uniqueness, of the frequent association of DM with malignancies? Putative cancer peptides that share antigenic epitopes with muscle or endomysial capillaries have not yet been identified. I envision that the future will shed light on all the above questions and enlighten our understanding of the immunopathogenesis of DM.

■ Polymyositis and Inclusion Body Myositis

In PM and IBM, there appears to be an antigen-directed and MHC-I-restricted cytotoxicity mediated by cytotoxic CD 8 + T cells [1,2,13,17,19], as supported by: the cytotoxicity of endomysial T cells to autologous myotubes; the clonal expansion of autoinvasive T cells and re-stricted usage of TCR gene families [20][21][22][23]; the upregulation of MHC-I class antigen and the B7-family of costimulatory molecules on the muscle fibers and their counterreceptors on the autoinvasive CD 8 + T cells [24,25]; the cytotoxic nature of CD 8 + T cells that contain perforin and granzyme granules directed towards the surface of the muscle fibers; and the upregulation of cytokines, chemokines and metalloproteinases that enhance the attachment and transmigration of T cells to the muscle. In spite of the progress made, a number of uncertainties exist. I envision that the future will clarify the following: i) identify the nature of the antigenic peptide bound by the MHC-I for presentation to CD 8 + T cells. The establishment of T cell clones from the endomysial T cells, screening with combinatorial peptide libraries, use of tetramers and searching for the antigen-specific clonotypes are some of the techniques currently in use to achieve this goal; ii) provide information about the role of endogenous self-proteins synthesized within the muscle fiber and answer if an endogenous peptide i. e. a virus, is the putative antigen; iii) provide information about the role of inflammation in IBM, whether it is primary as the immunopathology indicates, or secondary due to other proteins accumulated within the IBM vacuoles; iv) help us understand the reasons why IBM does not respond to immunotherapies [26], in spite of the profile identical to PM of the endomysial T-cells [2]; v) explain which cytokines exert myocytotoxic, protective or a fibrinogenic effect; and vi) provide information on the mechanism by which such a complex multinucleated cell, as the myocyte, undergoes cell death (necrosis vs. apoptosis).

■ Role of viruses

Although viruses have been indirectly associated with myositis, current molecular techniques have failed to prove their role in the disease. The best evidence for a viral connection has been with retroviruses. Monkeys infected with the simian immunodeficiency virus and humans infected with HIV and HTLV-I develop PM or IBM either as an isolated clinical phenomenon or concurrently with other manifestations of AIDS [1,2,8].Viral antigens or viral RNA are not detected within the muscle fibers indicating absence of persistent infection or viral replication within the muscle. In HIV-1 and HTLV-1 PM and IBM, the autoinvasive CD 8 + T cells are non viral-specific but they are cytotoxic, having the same activation markers as those seen in retroviral-negative PM and IBM. Some endomysial macrophages harbor retroviral antigens and may enhance local pathology via the release of cytokines, especially TNF-α. How these or other viruses could trigger disease remains unclear. I envision that the future will provide answers to the following: a) which viruses are those responsible in triggering PM or IBM? b) what viral receptors are needed to be expressed on the muscle fibers to facilitate viral infection? c) do viruses "hit and run" inducing an autoimmune attack, or incorporate into the genome and change the cell cycle of the muscle fibers to produce faulty antigenic muscle peptide? d) do viruses infect and persist as "innocent bystanders" but mutate over the years to affect the luxury functions of the cells and trigger an autoimmune reaction without causing muscle destruction [27]? and e) is there molecular mimicry between viral and muscle antigens?

■ Formation of vacuoles and amyloid in IBM

The formation of vacuoles in IBM remains unclear. They are unrelated to inflammation and always seen in fibers not surrounded by T-cells [2,28]. By contrast, the muscle fibers invaded by T-cells are never vacuolated.Within the vacuolated muscle fibers, there is increased activity of the P42 Mitogen Activated Protein Kinase indicating abnormal intracellular protein phosphorylation [29], but it remains unclear if this is specific to IBM or represents a stress factor seen also, non-specifically, in other myopathies. Vacuoles are observed in several disorders; we need to understand how they are formed and if their contents are debris in a graveyard, or remnants of the primary triggering factors unique to each myopathy. I am optimistic that molecular profiling will clarify many of these issues in the years to come. A fundamental concern in IBM is the relationship between cytokines and amyloid. Is the amyloid secondary, related to chronicity of the disease and the persistent chronic inflammation, or is it primary and generated de novo? A link between b-APP and inflammation may be via IL-1 and MMP-2, both of which are upregulated on the amyloid deposits [4]. In IBM, the noted excess of IL-1β may be derived not only from the abundant endomysial macrophages and T cells but also by the β-APP, which is a known enhancer of IL-1β production. In turn, IL-1β upregulates β-APP and β-APP gene expression and closes the loop, as follows: IL1β ǟ Ǟ β-APP ǟ Ǟ IL1β ǟ Ǟ inflammation [4]. Finding the molecular interaction between amyloid and inflammatory mediators will be of significant interest in many areas of neurobiology and therapeutics. I envision clinical trials in IBM using agents against two different targets that interact with each other, one against the inflammatory process that could also break the cycle of amyloid formation, and another against the amyloid that could theoretically have an effect on the inflammation. This work has implications beyond IBM as it could also provide some understanding on the role of neuro-inflammation in Alzheimer's disease. IBM offers a unique model to study the effect of β amyloid in human tissue owing to accessibility of muscle specimens from which β amyloid can be easily extracted and monitored.

Pharmacogenomics and Immunotherapies: Why the future looks brighter

Application of pharmacogenomics is anticipated to have a significant impact on inflammatory myopathies more than in any other disorder because of tissue availability. Knowing the allelic polymorphisms and an individual's muscle genotype could allow us to select a most suitable agent to maximize therapeutic efficacy while avoiding drugs that predispose to myotoxicity. For example, based on the cascade of genes involved in T cell activation, proliferation and muscle destruction, we may be able to select for a specific patient the most suitable immunomodulatory agent among those discussed below. Also, based on muscle pharmacogenomics we could avoid the use of myotoxic drugs that make an individual uniquely predisposed to myotoxicity, such as the one caused by steroids (steroid myopathy), or the one related to the concurrent use of statins. Further, manipulation of transcriptional signals associated with fibrosis or muscle regeneration may identify agents that could supplement immunotherapies. I envision that the future therapy in PM, DM and IBM will be centered not only on targeting inflammatory mediators but also in arresting the cascade of molecules associated with degeneration and fibrosis or in the upregulation of transcription factors associated with regeneration. The future therapies therefore could combine molecular immunotherapy with manipulation of transcriptional signals that strengthen the muscle fiber, enhance regeneration and prevent or arrest formation of fibrosis.

Although the current immunosuppressive therapies in DM and PM are not antigen-specific, they induce significant improvement in most of the patients for a period of time. High dose corticosteroids, azathioprine or methotrexate (combined from the outset or added later),IVIg and the use of mycophenolate,cyclosporin or cyclophosphamide are the main immunotherapeutic agents [30]. There is, undoubtedly, a need for more rational therapeutic approaches taking advantage of the progress on molecular immunology. I envision that agents already available or in the development stage, directed against the following regulatory pathways, may have a significant impact on the therapy of PM, DM and IBM in the years to come, as briefly discussed [30].

■ a) Agents Against Intracellular Signaling Pathways

The T-cell receptor (TCR) interaction with antigen/major histocompatibility molecule (MHC) activates intracellular phosphotyrosine kinases that mediate signaling via phosphorylation of immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs and transduction molecules such as CD52 [31,32]. Blockade of the CD52 molecules, for example, using a specific monoclonal antibody called CAMPATH causes apoptotic T-cell death. This agent is now available and is being tried not only in MS but also in inflammatory myopathies. Monoclonal antibodies against CD3 or CD45 may be future targets. T-cell activation is increased via costimulatory factors delivered, for example, by leukocyte functional antigen (LFA)/intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM) interaction, and can be blocked by monoclonal antibodies against LFA3, such as Alefacept, which has an effective down-regulatory role on memory T cells. The TCR engagement and co-stimulation also activate downstream substrates that dephosphorylate the nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) which enters the nucleus and binds to IL2 promoter to induce specific gene transcription. Binding of IL2 to its receptors activates an intracellular signaling cascade via janus kinases that finally lead to cell proliferation and differentiation [31,32]. The receptor for interleukin 2 can now be targeted by various monoclonal antibodies, such as daclizumab and basiliximab, which are already in clinical trials. The drug rapamycin binds to a kinase known as "target of rapamycin"(TOR) via the FK506 binding protein (FKBP) and inhibits the intracellular signaling disks from the IL2R, thereby inhibiting progression of activated T cells to the S phase of the cell cycle. These agents and those that are being developed act as missiles, specific for the aforementioned steps of T cell activation and proliferation, and could play a fundamental role in our future therapeutic approaches. Combination of several of these agents with steroids, mycophenolate or cyclosporine could target the various steps of T cell activation process and induce profound T cell inactivation or depletion via apoptosis.

■ b) Agents that Block Cellular Adhesion to the Vessel

Wall and Egression of Inflammatory Cells from the Blood stream to the Target Tissues A monoclonal antibody to α4β1 integrin (VLa4) on leukocytes (natalizumab), which is fundamental for adhesion and transmigration of T cells, has become a promising agent for the treatment of autoimmune diseases of the central and peripheral nervous systems.Additional agents, such as the humanized monoclonal antibody anti-CD11/CD18 (hu23F2G), the anti-ICAM-1 (CD54) mAb, and antagonistic peptide inhibitors of integrins may be promising future drugs for PM,DM,IBM.

■ c) Agents Blocking Cytokines and Chemokines

Monoclonal antibodies against tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α or soluble TNF-α receptors and cytokine modulators, such as interferon β (IFN-β), are already on the market while new similar agents are developed. Antagonists of chemokines, chemokine receptors, and metalloproteinases are future targets that I envision will be used alone or in various combinations.

■ d) Anti-B Cells

Immunosuppression by affecting B cells may be also achieved by using monoclonal antibody to CD20 (rituximab); this drug, marketed for B-cell lymphomas, is being tried in DM. Similar drugs may be in the offing.

■ e) Agents Against Complement

Monoclonal antibodies against C 5 that intercept the formation of membranolytic attack complex of the com-plement pathway are in clinical trials in an effort to stop the complement-mediated attack in DM. I envision that other monoclonal antibodies against components of the complement activation cascade will be available in the years to come.

Combination Therapies

I anticipate that in the future, neurologists will be using combination therapies of the various old and the new agents, as discussed above, much like the oncologists are now using multiple drug therapy. I believe this approach to be fruitful not only in PM, DM and IBM but also in the other autoimmune neurological disorders such as demyelinating neuropathies and multiple sclerosis. This is increasingly apparent in my practice today. As mentioned [33], when it comes to immunotherapies "the future is not what it used to be" [33].

Table 11Principles in Current Classification of Inflammatory MyopathiesJON 13531. Dermatomyositis (DM)-Typical disease: Affects skin and proximal muscles.

