Inflammatory disorders of muscle: progress in polymyositis, dermatomyositis and inclusion body myositis

Purpose of review

To provide an update on the major advances in inflammatory myopathies.

Recent findings

Polymyositis is an uncommon disorder that can be misdiagnosed when the old, and never validated, criteria of Bohan and Peter are used. New diagnostic criteria were recently introduced, in which the MHC/CD8 complex is considered a specific immunopathological marker because it distinguishes the antigen-driven inflammatory cells that characterize polymyositis and sporadic inclusion-body myositis from the non-specific, secondary inflammation seen in other disorders, such as dystrophies. In sporadic inclusion-body myositis the inflammatory cells invade non-vacuolated fibers, whereas the vacuolated fibers are not invaded by T cells, implying two independent processes, a primary immune process with antigen-driven T cells identical to polymyositis, and a degenerative process in which b-amyloid and amyloid-related proteins participate in vacuolar degeneration. In polymyositis and sporadic inclusion-body myositis, antigen-specific and clonally expanded autoinvasive T cells persist for years, even in different muscles, as reconfirmed by proof-of-principle techniques involving CDR3 spectratyping combined with laser microdissected single-cell polymerase chain reaction of the T-cell receptor genes. The formation of immunological synapse between autoinvasive T cells and muscle fibers was recently strengthened by the upregulation of co-stimulatory molecules ICOS/ICOS-L and PD-L1. A new, distinct myopathy characterized by T-cell-triggered macrophage hyperactivation has now been recognized in patients with dermatomyositis-like disease. Summary Despite recent progress, the antigen(s) responsible for T-cell activation in polymyositis and sporadic inclusion-body myositis and the cause of vacuolar degeneration in sporadic inclusionbody myositis remain unclear. Newer, more aggressive immunotherapies may be encouraging, but control trials are needed to prove efficacy.

Introduction

The inflammatory myopathies comprise three major and distinct subsets: dermatomyositis, polymyositis, and sporadic inclusion-body myositis (IBM) [1,2]. Dermatomyositis is easily recognized because the skin changes are dermatomyositis-specific and occur early in the course of the disease. Polymyositis remains a challenge in definition, and accounts for the majority of patients with IBM, dystrophic, toxic or metabolic myopathies erroneously diagnosed as polymyositis [3]. Sporadic IBM is easily suspected when a patient has slow disease onset and progression, early involvement of finger flexors or the quadriceps muscles, brisk endomysial inflammation combined with vacuolization, and is unresponsiveness to steroids [1-6]. The disorders remain complex, with a number of unsettled issues with reference to diagnostic criteria, immunoregulation, vacuolar degeneration or therapies. The progress made in these areas the past year is reviewed below.

Polymyositis revisited: progress in diagnostic criteria and disease definition

The need to introduce new criteria for the diagnosis of polymyositis has been realized since 1991, because the criteria proposed by Bohan and Peter in 1975 [7] had become inadequate to exclude many of the conditions presenting as polymyositis. It has also become apparent that the muscle biopsy, the gold standard in the diagnosis of polymyositis, may not reliably separate polymyositis from some toxic, necrotizing, or dystrophic myopathies, because inflammation may be prominent not only in polymyositis but also in certain dystrophies such as Duchenne, Becker's, fascioscapulohumeral or dysferlinopathies [3]. Furthermore, in rare biopsies of patients who fulfill the clinical criteria for polymyositis or IBM, inflammation may be minimal or absent. In addition, the vacuoles seen in IBM lack specific markers for the disease because similar vacuolated fibers are seen in other myopathies such as calpainopathies, dysferlinopathies, desminopathies or emerinopathies. The assumption that dermatomyositis is like polymyositis without a rash and IBM is like polymyositis without vacuoles is oversimplistic and erroneous [8 . ].

A major advance towards establishing histological specificity for these conditions is the presence of MHC-I/CD8 complex, which has emerged as an immune/inflammatory lesion specific for polymyositis and IBM. Although CD8 cells and patchy MHC-I expression can be seen in certain dystrophies, only in polymyositis and IBM do the CD8 cells consistently invade MHC-I-expressing muscle fibers [1,3,4,9, 10,11 . . ]. Because the MHC/CD8 lesion is inherently connected to disease definition and is central to the immunopathogenesis of polymyositis, it is a prerequisite diagnostic criterion, hence its inclusion in the newly revised criteria [11 . . ,12 . ] (see Table 1). The high specificity (495%) of the MHC-I expression for the diagnosis of polymyositis was validated in a new study that quantified and compared the intensity of MHC-I immunostaining between polymyositis and non-immune myopathies [13 . ,14 . ]. Because MHC-I expression persisted after immunotherapies, it was concluded that its presence offers additional diagnostic value [13 . ,14 . ]. The specificity of MHC-I/CD8 for polymyositis was further strengthened by the observations made in dysferlinopathies, in which CD8 cells, if present, did not invade healthy muscle fibers, as in polymyositis, whereas the MHC-I expression was patchy and the MHC-I/CD8 as a complex was rare [15 . ]. The need for adopting the newly described diagnostic criteria for polymyositis [11 . . ,12 . ] and avoiding misdiagnosis was illustrated in a retrospective review of 165 patients with inflammatory myopathies [16 . ]. Among them, nine had been diagnosed with polymyositis, 65 with unspecified myositis, and 32 with possible myositis. At re-examination 6.5 years later, however, five of the polymyositis patients had IBM, whereas the other four did not have true polymyositis. The majority of the others had connective tissue disease (CTD) or necrotizing myopathies [16 . ]. The study not only reconfirmed the long-standing view that polymyositis is rare as a stand-alone entity [11 

Macrophages in inflammatory and necrotizing myopathies

Activated macrophages can invade healthy muscle fibers and exert an effect different from that of scavenger cells [18]. In polymyositis and dermatomyositis, proinflammatory CD68-positive macrophages were found to express MRP8 and MRP14, two calcium-binding S-100 myeloidrelated proteins, and along with activated T cells invade non-necrotic muscle fibers [19 . ]. Because purified MRP8/MRP14 inhibit the proliferation of myoblasts and induce apoptosis via caspace-3 activation, macrophages can be directly myocytotoxic [19 . ]. The observation has implications for therapeutic interventions targeting macrophage-related factors.

The primary role of activated macrophages is exemplified in acquired necrotizing myopathy, an ill-defined condition often misdiagnosed as polymyositis, which presents with subacute muscle weakness, high creatine kinase levels, and muscle biopsy characterized by numerous necrotic fibers invaded by macrophages [3]. This myopathy has been associated with cancer, myotoxic or immunotoxic factors and viral infections, but it may also represent the first manifestation of an underlying dystrophinopathy, sarcoglycanopathy or dysferlinopathy. This is a multifactorial and difficult-to-treat disorder that needs further investigation. Some patients, disease onset below the age of 18 years myopathy has slow onset and evolves over months to years (in such cases think of IBM or dystrophy) patient has fatigue and myalgia, without muscle weakness, even if a transient creatine kinase elevation is seen (such patients may have fibromyalgia or fasciitis and their muscle biopsy is either normal or non-specific) there are no typical histological features of polymyositis, especially when there is an absence of MHC-I or MHC-I/CD8 complex IBM, Inclusion-body myositis.

Neuromuscular disease: muscle however, respond modestly to immunosuppressants [20 . ], suggesting an immune-mediated process.

A histologically distinct disease characterized by T-celltriggered macrophage hyperactivation is the recently described macrophagic inflammatory myopathy with abundant macrophages (IMAM) [21 . . ]. The disorder is detected among patients with dermatomyositis-like disease who have: (1) skin lesions, either dermatomyositis-specific or overlapping between dermatomyositis and systemic lupus erythematosus; (2) moderate muscle weakness; (3) myalgia; (4) the relative absence of specific antibodies;

(5) hemophagocytosis in bone marrow, spleen or lymph nodes manifested with fever, splenomegaly, coagulopathy and pancytopenia; and (6) invasion of the epimysium, perimysium and, rarely the endomysium, by CD68-positive macrophages with a large PASpositive cytoplasm. IMAM differs from macrophagic myofasciitis, which presents with chronic arthromyalgias and fatigue without muscle weakness [22]. In macrophagic myofasciitis, the pathology is connected to aluminum hydroxide-containing vaccines and is limited to areas of previous vaccinations where perimysial macrophages predominate. In contrast, the pathogenesis of IMAM is unclear, but macrophages and T cells have been implicated, probably in response to the uncontrolled secretion of cytokines TNF-a, IFN-g, and IL1-a. Cyclosporin, which suppresses lymphokine production and IL-2R expression, was beneficial in one IMAM patient [21 . . ].

Immunopathogenesis of polymyositis, dermatomyositis and inclusion-body myositis

In dermatomyositis, there is activation of complement that leads to the formation and deposition of membranolytic attack complex on the endomysial microvasculature, resulting in osmotic lysis of the endothelial cells, capillary necrosis, ischemia, microinfarcts, inflammation, endofascicular hypoperfusion, and finally perifascicular atrophy [1,3,4,9,11 . . ]. In polymyositis and IBM, there is evidence of an antigen-directed and MHC-I-restricted cytotoxicity mediated by CD8 T cells, as supported by the following: the cytotoxicity of endomysial T cells to autologous myotubes [9]; the clonal expansion of autoinvasive T cells and the restricted usage of T-cell receptor gene families [23][24][25][26][27][28]; the upregulation of co-stimulatory molecules [29,30]; and the release of perforin granules by autoinvasive CD8 cells to lyse muscle fibers [31]. Upregulated cytokines, chemokines and adhesion molecules [32 . ,33] enhance the transmigration of T cells from the circulation to the muscle (Fig. 1). Even though IBM is relatively resistant to therapies, its immunopathology is identical to polymyositis [1,3,4,11 ], confirming previous observations that the same antigens may continue to drive the inflammatory reaction [26].

For an antigen-specific T-cell response, the MHC-Iexpressing muscle fibers that invade CD8 cells need to express the prerequisite B7 family of co-stimulatory molecules and their counterreceptors. The muscle fibers in polymyositis and IBM express BB1, a member of the B7 family of molecules, and make cell-to-cell contact with CD8 cells that express their counterreceptors CD28 and CTLA-4 [29,30]. ], suggesting that in the immunological synapse of muscle/CD8 cells there is a balance of inflammatory stimuli that protects muscle fibers from excessive immune aggression.

Although the muscle fibers can behave as APCs, information about the hematopoietic dendritic cells (DCs), the most potent APCs in antigen presentation, has been sparse. Recent evidence suggests that within the endomysial infiltrates of polymyositis and dermatomyositis there are rare mature DCs but abundant immature DCs expressing the CCL2-/CCR6 chemokine receptor complex [38 . . ]. The critical muscle microenvironment necessary for the interaction of T cells, cytokines and chemokines with DCs for maturation and antigen presentation, however, still remains unclear.

The suggestion that the local production of proinflammatory cytokines, such as IFN-g, IL-1b, IL-17 and the chemokine CCL-20/CCR6 complex may contribute to breaking tolerance and homing of the immature DCs to the muscle tissue, remains speculative. Histityl transfer RNA synthetase (Jo-1 antigen), liberated from the muscle by the effect of cytokines (e.g. IL-17), was also proposed as a potential triggering factor in recruiting immature DCs to the sites of inflammation [39 . ], also acting as a chemoattractant in perpetuating the recruitment of T cells to the muscle. This interesting suggestion may be of limited significance because only 10% of myositis patients have Jo+1 antibodies.

In polymyositis, dermatomyositis and IBM, the transmigration of activated T cells and adhesion to the muscle fiber [32 The lack of a responsible autoantigen in polymyositis has hindered the development of an animal model. A new attempt at immunizing Lewis rats with purified skeletal myosin was promising because the animals developed histological signs of myositis with myosinreactive T cells, but was also disappointing because, like previous models, the animals were not weak [45 . ].

Vacuolated fibers and amyloid in sporadic inclusion-body myositis: relationship with inflammation

It is increasingly clear that in sporadic IBM the muscle fibers invaded by T cells are never vacuolated, whereas the vacuolated fibers are not surrounded by T cells, implying two parallel processes, one immunopathological and another degenerative [1,11 presenilin 1, apolipoprotein E, and oxidative stress proteins are also observed in other conditions, leading to the conclusion that they may not be specific to the vacuoles of sporadic IBM [47 . ]. The accumulation of these proteins, however, may be fundamental in understanding the degenerative process within vacuolated fibers. New molecules localized in IBM were BACE1 and BACE2, two enzymes participating in processing b-APP [49 . ], and cystain C, an endogenous cysteine protease inhibitor that could influence the processing and deposition of b-APP [50 . ], as has been proposed for Alzheimer's disease.

A critical issue in sporadic IBM is the relationship between cytokines, amyloid and chronic inflammation, an area also relevant in Alzheimer's disease. In sporadic IBM, cytokines such as IL-1b derived by macrophages and T cells are in excess, and co-localize with b-APP [51]. Because b-APP enhances IL-1b production, and IL-1b upregulates b-APP and b-APP gene expression (IL-1b / ? b-APP / ? IL-1b / ? inflammation), an interaction between amyloid and inflammatory mediators is likely [51]. Sporadic IBM offers a unique opportunity to study this relationship because of the accessibility of muscle specimens from which b-amyloid can be extracted and monitored. The immunogenicity of bamyloid was recently studied in healthy elderly subjects and patients with Alzheimer's disease and compared with young/middle-aged adults [52 . .  

Therapies

Although the current immunosuppressive therapies in dermatomyositis and polymyositis are not antigenspecific, they induce a significant improvement in most of the patients for a period of time. High-dose corticosteroids, azathioprine or methotrexate (combined from the outset or added later), IVIg and the use of mycophenolate, cyclosporin or cyclophosphamide are the main immunotherapeutic agents [54 . ,55 . ]. New drugs, such as FK506 and rapamycin, have also been considered. An effort has already begun to use more direct therapeutic approaches utilizing the available monoclonal antibodies directed against T-cell regulatory pathways, including CD56 (CAMPATH), co-stimulatory molecules (CD28/CTLA-4), adhesion molecules (leukocyte function antigen/interstitial cell adhesion molecules), cytokines (TNF-a), or B cells (CD20) [54 . ].

Two preliminary studies are of interest in this direction. The monoclonal antibody, infliximab, directed against TNF-a, was promising when given to two patients with dermatomyositis and polymyositis [56 . ]. Because TNF-a is a pleiotropic cytokine, its suppression may not always be beneficial, as witnessed by the development of polymyositis in a patient with rheumatoid arthritis treated with infliximab [57 . ]. In a 12-month, open randomized trial in 11 IBM patients, anti-T-lymphocyte globulin combined with methotrexate increased the strength of six patients by 1.4%. In contrast, five patients randomly assigned to receive methotrexate alone lost 11.1% of their strength (P = 0.021) [58 . ]. The study was significant in suggesting that an aggressive T-cell depletion may be beneficial, offering further justification for using other similar therapies. A relevant study using CAMPATH, a T-cell depleting monoclonal antibody, is now in progress at the National Institutes of Health.

Conclusion

In PM and sIBM, T cell-receptor gene profile analysis combined with CDR3 spectratyping have demonstrated that the autoinvasive T cells are antigen-driven and persist over time even in different muscles. Further, the interaction of CD8 cell with the muscle fiber forms an immunological synapse with upregulation of the prerequisite molecules such as MHC-1, BB1, ICOS-ICOS ligand, PD-L1, cytokines and chemokines. Because the MHC-I/CD8 complex is a specific immune marker, it was included in the newly introduced diagnostic criteria for PM and sIBM in order to distinguish the antigendriven nature of inflammation from the secondary, nonspecific, inflammatory changes seen in certain dystrophies. The immunopathology of sIBM is identical to PM, but the disease remains a challenge because it resists therapies. An effort to explore the interrelationship between vacuolar degeneration, bAPP amyloid deposits and the T cell or macrophage-derived cytokines, may be fruitful.

References and recommended reading

Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:

. of special interest Justification is provided for the need to adopt the new diagnostic criteria and the importance of including the MHC/CD8 complex. The accuracy and easy identification of the MHC/CD8 complex is defended. In a study of 61 patients with inflammatory myopathies and 163 controls, the authors confirmed that MHC-I expression is specific for polymyositis and is unchanged after therapy. It was concluded that MHC-I staining should be incorporated into the histological evaluation of inflammatory myopathies. A retrospective follow-up of 165 patients demonstrates that nine patients initially diagnosed with polymyositis did not have polymyositis when re-examined 6.5 years later. In spite of methodological limitations, the study confirms that polymyositis is uncommon and the Bohan and Peter criteria are obsolete.  A proof-of-principle study confirms, using a combination of spectratyping with single-cell polymerase chain reaction, that in polymyositis there is clonal expansion of autoinvasive T cells that could be identified and tracked in blood and muscle.   

An interesting study demonstrating that anti-T-lymphocytic globulin can be beneficial to patients with sporadic IBM. The study provides further support that intense immunotherapies against T cells may be promising in sporadic IBM.

]. Strong b-amyloidreactive and HLA-restricted T-cell responses against the immunogenic b-amyloid 1-42 peptide were found in the elderly, suggesting that b-amyloid is presented as an antigen by APCs in the context of MHC-T-cell receptor interaction. Whether b-amyloid can also serve as antigen processed by the APC functioning muscle fibers in sporadic IBM, leading to antigen-specific T-cell activation, remains unclear. It appears that in contrast to decreased T-cell immunity associated with aging, bamyloid-reactive T cells increased [52 . . ,53], necessitating the need to explore the antigenic role of amyloid in normal immunosenescence and sporadic IBM.

13 .13van der Pas J, Hengstman GJD, ter Laak HJ, et al. Diagnositic value of MHC class I staining in idiopathic inflammatory myopathies. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2004; 75:136-139.

14 .14Civatte M, Schleinitz N, Kranner P, et al. Class I MHC detection as a diagnostic tool in noninformative muscle biopsies of patients suffering from dermatomyositis (DM). Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 2003; 29:546-552. The usefulness of MHC-I expression in dermatomyositis patients was emphasized. 15 . Confalonieri P, Oliva L, Andreetta F, et al. Muscle inflammation and MHC class I up-regulation in muscular dystrophy with lack dysferlin: an immunopathological study. J Neuroimmunol 2003; 142:130-136. The pattern of MHC-I expression and infiltrates of CD8 cells was found to be different in dysferlinopathies compared with polymyositis. The results confirm the specificity of the MHC-I/CD8 lesion in polymyositis. 16 . van der Meulen MFG, Bonner M, Hoogendijk JE, et al. Polymyositis: a diagnostic entity reconsidered. Neurology 2003; 61:316-321.

.

Figarella-Figarella-Branger D, Civate M, Bartoli C, Pellissier JF. Cytokines, chemokines, and cell adhesion molecules in inflammatory myopathies. Muscle Nerve 2003; 28:659-682. A comprehensive, up-to-date review on the role of cytokines, chemokines and upregulated adhesion molecules in inflammatory myopathies. Their significance in applying specific therapies was noted. 33 Choi Y, Dalakas MC. Expression of matrix metalloproteinases in the muscle of patients with inflammatory myopathies. Neurology 2000; 54:65-71. 34 . . Hofbauer M, Wiesner S, Babbe H, et al. Clonal tracking of autoaggressive T cells in polymyositis by combining laser microdissection, single-cell PCR and CDR3 spectratype analysis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003; 100:4090-4095.A proof-of-principle study confirms, using a combination of spectratyping with single-cell polymerase chain reaction, that in polymyositis there is clonal expansion of autoinvasive T cells that could be identified and tracked in blood and muscle.

35 .35Muntzing K, Lindberg C, Moslemi AR, Oldorfs A. Inclusion body myositis: clonal expansions of muscle-infiltrating T cells persist over time.Scand J  Immunol 2003; 58:195-200. This study confirms that in IBM the autoinvasive T cells are clonally expanded and certain clones persist for many years even in different muscles. It is concluded that in IBM there is a continuous antigen-driven T-cell response validating previous findings.

Mitsdoerffer M, Schneider D, et al. Muscle fibers and cultured muscle cells express the B7.1/2 related costimulatory molecule ICOSL: implications for the pathogenesis of inflammatory myopathies. Brain 2003; 126:1026-1035. Muscle fibers from polymyositis, dermatomyositis and IBM express ICOS ligand, a distinct functional co-stimulatory molecule, providing further evidence that in inflammatory myopathies the muscle fibers may function as APCs.

37 .37Wiendl H, Mitsdoerffer M, Schneider D, et al. Human muscle cells express a B7-related molecule, B7-H1, with strong negative immune regulatory potential: a novel mechanism of counterbalancing the immune attack in idiopathic inflammatory myopathies. FASEB J 2003; 17:1892-1894. The inhibitory co-stimulatory molecule B7-H1 was expressed in inflammatory myopathies, and may protect muscle fibers from immune aggression.

. . ] and is misdiagnosed with the Bohan and Peter criteria [1], but questioned even the mere existence of polymyositis as an entity [8 . ,16 . ]. Some patients with indolent CTD may present with diffuse muscle-joint pain syndrome, modest creatine kinase elevation, a 'give-way' pattern of weakness with difficulty in sustaining effort, non-specific muscle biopsy, and mild but transient improvement with steroids [11 . . ,17 . ]. It is unclear what the diagnosis of this common and disabling condition is; rheumatologists think of it as polymyositis; neurologists as fibromyalgia in a setting of CTD; we believe it represents fasciitis.

Table 11. Diagnostic criteria of polymyositis1. Myopathic weakness, which:evolves over weeks to monthsspares facial and eye musclesis manifested in patients above the age of 18 years2. Patient DOES NOT have:rash, characteristic of dermatomyositisa family history of neuromuscular diseasesexposure to myotoxic drugs, (D-pencillamine, zidovudine, statins)endocrine disease (hypothyroid, hyperthyroid, hypoparathyroid,hypercortisolism)neurogenic disease (excluded by electromyogram and neurologicalexamination)dystrophies and metabolic myopathies (excluded by history andmuscle biopsy)IBM (excluded by clinical examination and muscle biopsy)3. Disease can be associated with:another autoimmune disease or viral infection4. Polymyositis is rare, as a stand-alone entity5. Reconsider polymyositis if:

Figure 1. Molecules, receptors and their ligands involved in the transgression of T cells through the endothelial cell wall and recognition of antigens on muscle fibersLeukocyte function antigen (LFA) type I/interstitial cell adhesion molecule (ICAM) type Ibinding and T-cell receptor (TCR) scanning forantigen initiates the formation of animmunological synapse. Stimulation issupported and enhanced by the engagement ofBB1, CD40, and perhaps additionalco-stimulatory molecules with their ligandsCD28, CTLA and CD40L. Metalloproteinasesfacilitate the migration of T cells and theirattachment to the muscle surface. Muscle fibernecrosis occurs via the perforin granulesreleased by the autoaggressive T cells. A directmyocytotoxic effect exerted by the releasedIFN-g, IL1 or TNF-a may also play a role. Deathof the muscle fiber is mediated by a form ofnecrosis rather than apoptosis, presumablybecause of the counterbalancing effect orprotection by the anti-apoptotic molecules Bcl-2,hILP and FLIP, which are upregulated inpolymyositis and inclusion-body myositis (IBM)muscles. Fas is also expressed, but it does notmediate apoptosis in the muscle. Theupregulated neuronal cell adhesion molecule(NCAM) on degenerating muscle fibers mayenhance regeneration. Ag, Antigen; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase; TAP, transporter protein; VCAM, vascular cell adhesion molecule.. . ,45 . ]. Vacuoles are observed in several myopathies, such as hereditary IBM caused by GNE mutations, X-linked Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, rigid-spine syndrome, distal myopathies or even chronic neurogenic conditions such as post-polio[46,47 . ,48]. Furthermore, the intracellular accumulation of amyloid-related proteins, bamyloid precursor protein (b-APP), phosphorylated tau,

An up-to-date, comprehensive review of polymyositis and dermatomyositis. The clinical, immunopathological and histological features of these disorders, the introduction of new diagnostic criteria, and an update on present and future therapies are described.4 Dalakas MC. Understanding the immunopathogenesis of inclusion bodymyositis: present and future prospects. Rev Neurol 2002; 158:948-958.5 Askanas V, Engel WK. sporadic inclusion body myositis and hereditaryinclusion-body myopathies. Arch Neurol 1988; 55:915-920.6 Griggs RC, Askanas V, DiMauro S, et al. Inclusion body myositis andmyopathies. Ann Neurol 1995; 38:705-713.7 Bohan A, Peter JB. Polymyositis and dermatomyositis. N Engl J Med 1975;292:344-347.8Amato AA, Griggs RC. Unicorns, dragons, polymyositis, and other.mythological beasts. Neurology 2003; 61:288-290.An interesting editorial discussing how uncommon polymyositis is and the pitfalls inmisdiagnosis when the current criteria of Bohan and Peter are applied.9 Hohlfeld R, Engel AG. The immunobiology of muscle. Immunol Today 1994;15:269-274.10 Arahata K, Engel AG. Monoclonal antibody analysis of mononuclear cells inmyopathies III. Immunoelectron microscopy aspects of cell-mediated musclefiber injury. Ann Neurol 1986; 19:112-125.11Dalakas MC, Hohlfeld R. Polymyositis and dermatomyositis. Lancet 2003;. .362:971-982.12Dalakas MC, Hohlfeld R. Diagnostic criteria for polymyositis and dermato-.myositis. Lancet 2003; 362:1762-1763.. .of outstanding interest1 Dalakas MC. Polymyositis, dermatomyositis and inclusion-body myositis. NEngl J Med 1991; 325:1487-1498.2 Mastaglia FL, Philips BA. Idiopathic inflammatory myopathies: epidemiology,classification and diagnostic criteria. Rheum Dis Clin North Am 2002;28:723-741.3 Dalakas MC. Muscle biopsy findings in inflammatory myopathies. Rheum DisClin North Am 2002; 28:779-798.

