Mutant ubiquitin UBB ؉1 is accumulated in sporadic inclusion-body myositis muscle fibers

Mutant ubiquitin (UBB ϩ1 ), a product of "molecular misreading," is toxic to cells because its ubiquitinated form inhibits the proteasome, contributing to accumulation of misfolded proteins and their ensuing toxicity. The authors demonstrate in 10 sporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM) muscle biopsies that UBB ϩ1 is accumulated in aggregates containing amyloid-␤ and phosphorylated-tau. In s-IBM, UBB ϩ1 may be pathogenic by inhibiting proteasome, thereby promoting accumulation of cytotoxic misfolded amyloid-␤ and phosphorylated-tau.

Sporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM) is of unknown etiology and pathogenesis. 1 Its muscle biopsy features include 1) vacuolated muscle fibers; 2) intramuscle fiber multiprotein aggregates (inclusions); and 3) various degrees of mononuclear cell inflammation. 1 The s-IBM muscle fiber phenotype has similarities to the Alzheimer disease (AD) brain, including accumulation of several AD characteristic proteins. 1 Two major types of intracellular aggregates in s-IBM muscle fibers contain either amyloid-␤ (A␤) or phosphorylatedtau (p-tau), 1 and both types are ubiquitinated. 1 They stain with Congo red, crystal violet, and thioflavin-S, indicating they contain proteins in alternate conformation ("misfolded") that are assembled in the ␤-pleated sheet configuration of amyloid. 1 s-IBM aggregates occur mainly in vacuole-free cytoplasm of vacuolated muscle fibers and in the cytoplasm of the nonvacuolated muscle fibers.

Both aggregate types contain several other proteins. 1 Some, such as ␣-synuclein, also have a propensity to misfold and form ␤-sheet amyloid. 1 The "unfolded protein response" (UPR) recently was demonstrated in s-IBM muscle fibers. 2 UPR is considered a protective mechanism involving increased synthesis of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) chaperones in response to accumulated misfolded proteins. 2 The UPR strongly suggests that protein misfolding plays a role in s-IBM pathogenesis, including the intramyofiber formation of multiprotein aggregates.

"Molecular misreading," a newly recognized phenomenon, designates acquired, non-DNA-encoded dinucleotide deletions occurring within messenger RNA, resulting in production of potentially toxic mu-tant proteins. 3 Aberrant transcripts are formed as a result of dinucleotide loss (⌬GA, ⌬GU) during or after transcription, and they can be translated from the deletion onward into the ϩ1 reading frame to produce abnormal proteins, e.g., mutant ubiquitin, termed UBB ϩ1 . UBB ϩ1 was shown accumulated in plaques (containing A␤) and neurofibrillary tangles (containing p-tau) of AD brain 3 and in brains of some tauopathies. 4 UBB ϩ1 itself can become ubiquitinated, and that form inhibits the proteasome. 4 While some UBB ϩ1 transcripts are present in normal brains, UBB ϩ1 protein is accumulated only in brains of those with neurodegenerative disorders in which proteasomal inhibition has been proposed to play a pathogenetic role. 4 Accordingly, accumulated UBB ϩ1 was proposed to be a marker for proteasomal dysfunction in brain. 4 Because misfolded proteins appear to play a role in s-IBM pathogenesis, 1,2 we asked whether UBB ϩ1 accumulates in s-IBM protein aggregates.

Materials and methods. Muscle biopsies. Immunocytochemistry was performed as described previously 2,5 on 10-m transverse sections of fresh-frozen diagnostic muscle biopsies obtained, with informed consent, from 27 patients with s-IBM (10), dermatomyositis (3), polymyositis (2), morphologically nonspecific myopathy (3), denervation (6), and normal muscle (3). All s-IBM biopsies met diagnostic criteria. 1 All 10 s-IBM muscle biopsies had 10 age-matched controls; the rest of the control subjects were younger patients.

Light microscopic immunocytochemistry. UBB ϩ1 was localized using three well-characterized rabbit polyclonal antibodies raised against the C-terminus of the UBB ϩ1 sequence: Ubi 2 ϩ1 (140994) and Ubi2A (180398) against epitope RQDHHPGSGAQ, and Ubi3 (050897) against epitope YADLREDPDRQDHHPGS-GAQ, 4 diluted 1:50 to 700. They specifically recognize the mutant From the USC Neuromuscular Center (Drs. Fratta, Engel, Vattemi, and Askanas), Department of Neurology, University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Good Samaritan Hospital, Los Angeles, CA; and Netherlands Institute for Brain Research (Drs. Van Leeuwen and Hol), Research Group Molecular Misreading, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Supported by grants (to V.A.) from the National Institutes of Health (AG16768 Merit Award), the Muscular Dystrophy Association and The Myositis Association, and the Helen Lewis Research Fund. Received February 18, 2004. Accepted in final form May 14, 2004. Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr. Valerie Askanas, USC Neuromuscular Center, Good Samaritan Hospital, 637 South Lucas Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90017-1912; e-mail: askanas@hsc.usc.edu C-terminal of UBB ϩ1 (figure 1). Specificity of those antibodies was described, 4 and in our immunoblots they recognized only UBB ϩ1 (see figure 1). Double immunofluorescence used antibodies against UBB ϩ1 in combination with one of these mouse monoclonal antibodies: 1) antibody against wild-type (WT) ubiquitin (Chemicon, Temecula, CA), diluted 1:100; 2) antibody 6E10 (Signet, Dedham, MA), diluted 1:100, which recognizes A␤ in IBM muscle fibers; 5 and 3) antibody SMI-31 (Sternberger Monoclonals, Inc., Baltimore, MD), diluted 1:1000, which recognizes p-tau in s-IBM muscle fibers. 1 To block nonspecific binding of an antibody to Fc receptors, sections were preincubated with normal goat or rabbit serum diluted 1:10, as described previously. 2,5 Controls for staining specificity were omission of the primary antibody, its replacement with nonimmune sera or irrelevant antibody, and absorption of Ubi 2 ϩ1 (140994) antibody with UBB ϩ1 peptide-these were all negative.

Immuno-electronmicroscopy was done on 10-m unfixed frozen sections. 2,5 For double immunolocalization, sections were incubated concurrently in a rabbit polyclonal antibody against UBB ϩ1 combined with a mouse monoclonal antibody: 6E10, SMI31, or antibody against WT ubiquitin. This was followed by incubation in two different species-specific secondary antibodies conjugated either to 10-or 5-nm gold particles. 2,5 The sections were then processed for electronmicroscopy. 2,5 Immunoblots. To confirm specificity of the UBB ϩ1 antibodies, immunoblots were performed. One microgram of WT-UB (Biomol, Plymouth Meeting, PA) and UBB ϩ1 peptides were loaded onto NuPAGE gels (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). After electrophoresis, samples were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes, which were then immunoprobed with antibodies against WT ubiquitin and UBB ϩ1 (see figure 1). The blots were developed with the Western Breeze chemiluminescent kit (Invitrogen) for film exposure. Immunoblots confirmed the UBB ϩ1 antibody specificities (see figure 1).

Results.

Light microscopic immunocytochemistry. s-IBM. In all s-IBM biopsies, on a given cross-section, 70 to 80% of the vacuolated muscle fibers contained, mainly in their nonvacuolated cytoplasm, strong UBB ϩ1 immunoreactivity in the form of numerous well-defined, varioussized, plaquelike, dotty, or elongated aggregates (figure 2,  A and B). Additionally, 10 to 15% of the nonvacuolated, otherwise normal-appearing (on a given cross-section) fibers contained similar aggregates. In all abnormal muscle fibers, aggregates immunoreactive for UBB ϩ1 were concurrently immunoreactive with antibodies against WT ubiquitin (recognizing an epitope on the first 75 amino acids of UBB ϩ1 ), A␤, or p-tau (figure 2, C-H).

Other diseased and normal human muscle. None of the control normal or diseased biopsies had muscle fibers immunoreactive with antibodies against UBB ϩ1 .

Figure 1. Antibody specificity. (A) Diagram of WT-UB and UBB ϩ1 and immunogens of the three anti-UBB ϩ1 antibodies used. (B) Immunoblots of WT-UB and UBB ϩ1

peptides. In B1, the blot was immunoprobed with anti-WT-UB antibody, and in B2, the blot was immunoprobed with anti-UBB ϩ1 antibody Ubi3. In B1, the anti-WT-UB recognized the WT-UB and UBB ϩ1 , whereas in B2, the anti-UBB ϩ1 recognized only UBB ϩ1 . ϩ1 (C, E, and G); all ϫ1,100.

Figure 2. Immunofluorescence of UBB ϩ1 within sporadic inclusion body myositis muscle fibers. Single-label immunofluorescence illustrates strongly immunoreactive, various-sized aggregates of UBB ϩ1 in a vacuolated (A) and nonvacuolated (B) muscle fiber. Most of the aggregates are present in the vacuole-free cytoplasm. (C-H) Doublelabel immunofluorescence demonstrated that the aggregates immunoreactive for WT-UB (D), amyloid-␤ (F), and phosphorylated-tau (H) were also immunoreactive for UBB

Electronmicroscopic immunocytochemistry. In s-IBM muscle fibers, UBB ϩ1 immunoreactivity was associated with the same structures as WT ubiquitin, A␤, and p-tau: the 6-to 10-nm amyloid-like fibrils and floccular material had immunoreactivities of A␤, UBB ϩ1 , and WT ubiquitin (figure 3, B, C, and E), whereas the paired helical filaments had immunoreactivities of p-tau, UBB ϩ1 , and WT ubiquitin (figure 3, A, D, and F).

Discussion. Our studies demonstrate that UBB ϩ1 accumulates within s-IBM muscle fibers, where it is associated with aggregates containing WT ubiquitin and either A␤ or p-tau. Those associations suggest that UBB ϩ1 may influence formation of the aggregates. One mechanism involved in formation of cellular aggregates composed of misfolded proteins is through inhibition of the "ubiquitin-proteasome system" (UPS). 6 UPS is the main degradation pathway for proteins, especially short-lived normal, misfolded, or otherwise damaged proteins. 6 Degradation processes occurring through the 26S proteasome are ubiquitin dependent because most proteins must become conjugated to a polyubiquitin chain before entering and being degraded by the proteasome. 6 Inhibition of proteasome function leads to accumulation of misfolded proteins and their ensuing cytotoxicity. 6 Function of the proteasome is influenced by various cellular factors, including aging, oxidative stress, and misfolded proteins. Impaired proteasomal function has been proposed to contribute importantly to the pathogenesis of several neurodegenerative disorders. 6 UBB ϩ1 , a product of molecular misreading, cannot ubiquitinate target proteins because of replacement of the essential C-terminal glycine (G76) with a 20-amino acid residue (ϩ1) extension. 3 However, UBB ϩ1 itself can be ubiquitinated by WT ubiquitin, which binds to lysine residues in UBB ϩ1 . 3 Polyubiquitinated UBB ϩ1 can accumulate and, if present in high levels, inhibits the 26S proteasome. 3,4 Our study showing accumulation of UBB ϩ1 in s-IBM muscle fibers is the first demonstration in diseased human muscle of "molecular misreading" causing translation of a mutant protein. We propose that the aging cellular environment of s-IBM muscle fibers, combined with oxidative stress 1 and perhaps other detrimental molecular events, leads to abnormal production and accumulation of UBB ϩ1 . We suggest that UBB ϩ1 -inhibited proteasome cannot properly degrade several proteins, including A␤ and p-tau, resulting in their accumulation and aggregation.

Also in s-IBM muscle fibers, increased synthesis of A␤ precursor protein (A␤PP) 7 is associated with abnormal processing of A␤PP 1 and accumulation of its cytotoxic fragment A␤, 5 which can further contribute to 26S proteasome inhibition. 3,4 P-tau also can inhibit proteasome function. 8 Our recent demonstration in s-IBM muscle fibers of large and small aggresomes, 9 considered to result from proteasome inhibition, 10 further supports our proposal that proteasome inhibition and protein misfolding play a novel role in s-IBM pathogenesis. Whether UBB ϩ1 , in association with other accumulated proteins and the ensuing proteasomal abnormal- (5-nm gold particles) and WT-UB (10-nm gold particles) are associated with paired helical filaments (C) and 6to 10-nm diameter amyloid-like fibrils and floccular and amorphous material (D). (E) UBB ϩ1 (5-nm gold particles) and amyloid-␤ (10-nm gold particles) are associated with 6-to 10-nm diameter amyloid-like fibrils and amorphous material. (F) UBB ϩ1 (5-nm gold particles) and phosphorylated-tau (10-nm gold particles) are associated with paired helical filaments. A and C, ϫ53,400; B, ϫ95,000; D-F, ϫ85,000.

ities, participates in the induction of the inflammatory reaction in the s-IBM muscle biopsies remains presently unknown.

Acknowledgment

The authors thank Maggie Baburyan for providing technical assistance in photography.

Figure 3 .3Figure 3. Single-and double-label gold immuno-electronmicroscopy within sporadic inclusion body myositis muscle fibers. (A, B) UBB ϩ1 , 10-nm gold particles in A and 5-nm gold particles in B, is associated with paired helical filaments (A) and 6-to 10-nm diameter amyloid-like fibrils (B). (C, D) UBB ϩ1(5-nm gold particles) and WT-UB (10-nm gold particles) are associated with paired helical filaments (C) and 6to 10-nm diameter amyloid-like fibrils and floccular and amorphous material (D). (E) UBB ϩ1 (5-nm gold particles) and amyloid-␤ (10-nm gold particles) are associated with 6-to 10-nm diameter amyloid-like fibrils and amorphous material. (F) UBB ϩ1 (5-nm gold particles) and phosphorylated-tau (10-nm gold particles) are associated with paired helical filaments. A and C, ϫ53,400; B, ϫ95,000; D-F, ϫ85,000.

