Myositis: an update on pathogenesis

Purpose of review

The etiology and much about the pathogenesis of the inflammatory myopathies remain a mystery. In this review, we investigate recent research efforts to understand the pathogenesis of the diverse entities of polymyositis (PM), dermatomyositis (DM), and inclusion body myositis (IBM), diseases that result from interactions between environmental risk factors and genetic susceptibility.

Recent findings

Over the past year, there has been considerable progress toward better understanding of IBM, with relatively few developments toward understanding PM and DM. Although these diseases may share some common clinical phenotypic and serologic components, they differ on a molecular and cellular level.

Summary

The need for definitive, safer therapies in these diseases makes vital the search for defining detailed pathogenesis of inflammation and muscle fiber damage at the molecular level.

Introduction

The etiology and much about the pathogenesis of the inflammatory myopathies remain elusive. We review here recent scientific endeavors exploring the pathogenesis of the diverse entities of polymyositis (PM), dermatomyositis (DM), and inclusion body myositis (IBM), diseases that are held to result from interactions between environmental risk factors and genetic susceptibility. There have been relatively few developments toward understanding PM and DM pathogenesis in the past year, but considerable progress toward better understanding of IBM.

Polymyositis and dermatomyositis

Experimental models

A Swedish study examined the skeletal muscle changes in an experimental model of Chagas disease and compared its muscle inflammation pattern with that of the human inflammatory myopathies [1••]. Female CBA/J mice were injected with the Tulahuen strain of T. cruzi, and the inflammatory phenotype was characterized. The predominant muscle cell types in the model were macrophages and T cells, with CD4+ cells near blood vessels and CD8+ cells present within the perimysium; almost no B cells were present; no vacuolar fibers were noted. Thus, the model most closely approximates PM. This may be a useful animal model for PM, particularly as it relates to understanding the order of events that lead to inflammation and muscle damage in association with Tcell infiltration.

Clinical aspects Potential association with viral illness

Attempts to find evidence of a direct role of viral infection in myositis have continued, though again without really credible success.

A rare example of a viral myopathy seen in conjunction with the West Nile Virus was noted in one case report [2]. Symptoms in addition to the neurologic manifestations included a myositis characterized by a T-lymphocyte infiltration of nerve fibers, leading the authors to conclude that the virus may reach the central nervous system via peripheral nerves. There was muscle fiber necrosis, atrophy, and inflammation with an exclusive Tcell infiltration with a slight predominance of CD4+ over CD8+ cells and with scattered CD68+ cells. There were no inflammatory changes seen in blood vessels and muscle septa, and WNV antigens were not detected by immunohistochemistry. This appearance suggests that the myalgia often reported with a self-limited WNV illness [3] might be a viral myositis rather than evidence of neurologic involvement. Douche-Aourik et al. [4] reported the persistence of enterovirus RNA in muscle samples of patients with inflammatory myopathies and fibromyalgia. There was no evidence of VP-1 protein in the samples positive for putative viral RNA. These findings must be read with skepticism. The authors fail to cite the strongest evidence that enteroviral sequences are absent from myositis samples-a study in which the potential technical problems that they name, and others they missed, had been carefully anticipated and excluded [5].

A French [6] study was unable to detect B19 DNA by PCR in 7 of 8 muscle biopsy samples obtained from patients with inflammatory myopathy, and viral capsid protein expression was not demonstrated by immunohistochemistry. One patient had a transiently positive viral capsid protein that became negative even in the absence of disease flare. Parvovirus B19 was unable to induce IL-6 production by myoblasts in vitro.

Interstitial lung disease

Fathi et al. [7•] investigated the prevalence and disease predictors for ILD in 17 patients newly diagnosed with PM or DM in Sweden. Sixty-five percent had evidence of pulmonary involvement, even in the absence of symptoms. Arthritis and anti-Jo-1 antibodies were predictors of concomitant pulmonary involvement. We agree with the authors' suggestion that chest x-ray, HRCT, PFTs, and anti-Jo-1 antibodies should be included in the initial investigation of PM and DM patients. Schnabel et al. [8•] screened 63 consecutive PM/DM patients for lung disease. They found evidence of ILD in 32% of subjects screened. Those patients who progressed were distinguished by evidence of ground-glass opacities on HRCT and by BAL neutrophilia. Cyclophosphamide provided stabilization, and sometimes improvement, in all members of this group. Those patients without rapidly progressive disease had stable lung disease on moderateintensity immunosuppressives during the mean of 35 months of follow-up. This study suggests that treatment for ILD in future clinical trials for PM/DM-associated lung disease should stratify patients.

Nonspecific interstitial pneumonia was the most common observed histologic pattern in patients with clinically amyopathic dermatomyositis in a retrospective multicenter study performed in France [9]. A recent case report reminds us that fatal interstitial fibrosis may be present in the presence of clinically amyopathic dermatomyositis, even if there is no evidence of anti-Jo-1 or other antisynthetase antibodies [10].

Necrotizing myopathy

On occasion, patients presenting with a clinically apparent idiopathic inflammatory myopathy may lack mononuclear cell infiltrate on muscle biopsy despite the presence of a necrotizing myopathy [11]. This subset of patients may still be steroid responsive, as evidenced by this report, thus suggesting that clinicians not delay steroid therapy despite lack of a monocellular infiltrate when the rest of the clinical picture suggests acute myositis. De Bleecker et al. [12•] report a case of a patient with an ill-defined overlap syndrome including a chronic-steroid responsive necrotizing myopathy in the absence of a malignancy. The muscle biopsy demonstrated little inflammation, but there was MAC deposition on the mural elements of the vessel wall, and MHC class I was present on the surface of all muscle fibers. Thus, virtual absence of inflammatory changes need not exclude the diagnosis of a potentially treatable autoimmune inflammatory myopathy. The pathogenesis in this interesting disease subset needs study.

Environmental risk factors

In the most interesting and persuasive evidence of an environmental contribution to the expression of an autoimmune rheumatic disease, Okada et al. [13••] demonstrated that among 13 geoclimatic variables studied in a population of 919 consecutive myositis patients from 15 locations surface ultraviolet radiation intensity was the strongest contributor to DM and was strongly related to the proportion of anti-Mi2 antibodies. These data suggest that ultraviolet radiation exposure may modulate the expression of autoimmune diseases such as myositis both immunologically and clinically in different populations around the world. This may be related to the observation that, at least in DM, increased numbers of ultraviolet light-induced apoptotic cells in the skin can lead to a supra-threshold concentration of antigenic peptides [14].

Cellular immune mechanisms

Tumor necrosis factor-␣ Kuru et al. [15] studied the expression of TNF-␣ and its receptor in PM, DM, and Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) using in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry. They demonstrated that TNF-␣ mRNA and protein were present in muscle fibers in all three disease entities but were rare or absent in neurologic disorders or normal controls. The proportion of TNF-␣positive fibers correlated with the proportion of regenerating fibers (those that were positive for the developmental form of myosin heavy chain, MHC-d) suggesting that TNF-␣ is produced and expressed by muscle fibers and is associated with regeneration.

Although the role of TNF in the pathogenesis of inflammatory myopathies remains uncertain, anecdotal evidence of the efficacy of anti-TNF therapy in inflammatory myopathies has appeared. We believe that such evidence must be heavily discounted because of a very strong reporting bias towards positive outcomes in the early application of almost any new therapy [16]. The apparent development of clinical polymyositis in a patient with long-standing RA who underwent infliximab therapy merits notice. Although the patient was clinically asymptomatic with respect to polymyositis, anti-Jo-1 antibodies were present before the initiation of anti-TNF-␣ therapy [17]. Thus anti-TNF-␣ agents should be administered with caution in patients with myositisspecific as well as antinuclear antibodies even in the absence of a clinical myopathy.

Co-stimulatory molecules

One of the most exciting recent discoveries is the finding of the co-stimulatory molecule B7-H1 expression in cultured human myoblasts in the presence of INF-␥ as well as its presence in inflammatory myopathy muscle specimens. Weindl et al. [18•] examined the pathophysiologic significance of B7-H1 by examining muscle biopsies from patients with IIM as well as those with a noninflammatory myopathy and normal controls for B7-H1 expression by immunohistochemistry. MHC Class I expression and anti-CD28 were assessed as well. Nonmyopathic and noninflammatory myopathy specimens had no evidence of B7-H1 expression, whereas B7-H1 expression was detected in almost all inflammatory myopathy specimens. The B7-H1 positive muscle fibers were in direct contact with T cells, and they were found at the juxtaposition of inflammatory cells and non-necrotic damaged muscle fibers. The authors contend that the role of B7-H1 may be a protective mechanism activated in response to damage of MHC-expressing target cells provoked by INF-␥.

Human cells express inducible co-stimulator ligand (ICOSL), another functional co-stimulatory member of the B7 family. ICOSL interacts with its receptor, ICOS, on activated T cells to regulate CD4 and CD8 T-cell responses. Wiendl et al [19•] showed that normal fibers constitutively expressed low levels of ICOSL while muscle fibers in patients with inflammatory myopathies demonstrated markedly increased ICOSL expression. The ICOSL-ICOS interactions may play a part in antigen presentation in the pathogenesis of inflammatory myopathies.

Myosin heavy chain

The utility of MHC Class I staining in evaluating myopathies is receiving considerable attention. Van der Pas et al. [20] proposed to determine whether MHC Class I antigen expression is upregulated in the sarcolemma in patients with IIM, and if so, whether this upregulation could be used as an additional diagnostic tool. They concluded that detection of sarcolemmal MHC Class I is a valid test for IIM and is not affected by immunosuppressive therapy used for less than 4 weeks. About 4% of biopsies from patients with a dystrophy were positive. In a smaller study, Civatte et al. [21] further investigated the value of MHC Class I detection in muscle biopsies of patients believed to have DM clinically despite having noninformative muscle biopsies. They found abnormal sarcolemmal expression of class I MHC regardless of whether or not the muscle biopsy demonstrated histopathology consistent with DM. In patients with typical biopsy features, class I expression was observed in nearly all muscle fibers but was strongest in perifascicular areas or was restricted to perifascicular atrophic fibers. In all muscle biopsies of DM patients without typical DM features, only some perifascicular fibers expressed class I MHC. They concluded that abnormal perifascicular MHC class I expression may aid in diagnosis in patients with clinical DM in the absence of conclusive histopathologic evidence of the disease.

Cytokine/cell adhesion/signaling molecules/chemokines/receptors

Both angiogenesis and leukocyte recruitment play a critical role in chronic inflammation, and chemokines have an essential function in these processes. De Paepe et al.

[22] hypothesized that the CXCR4/SDF-1 interaction represented a regulatory system involved in the accumulation, migration, and activation of lymphocytes important in the immunopathogenesis of IIM. They demonstrated that CXCR chemokine receptors levels are elevated in IIM, suggesting either that the CXCR4positive cells are selectively recruited to sites of inflammation via local SDF-1 secretion or that membranous CXCR4 secretion is locally upregulated. Thus the SDF-1/CXCR4 interaction may be a useful therapeutic target.

Autoreactive T cells are important mediators of tissue injury and potential targets for intervention in human autoimmune diseases including polymyositis. In a technically fascinating and impressive paper, Hofbauer et al.

[23••] successfully characterized the TCR of autoaggressive T cells over time in biopsies of patients with myositis. This important technique has applicability to other autoimmune inflammatory disorders as well.

Lindvall's group showed that the LFA-1/VLA-4 ratio was lower in patients with PM compared with patients with noninflammatory myopathy or normal controls [24]. They suggest that the VLA-4/VCAM-1 system is an important part of chronic T-cell inflammation of the muscle.

S-protein and CD-59 are complement regulators that bind to and inactivate the complement membrane attack complex (MAC). In addition to the deposition of MAC in necrotic fibers, MAC has been found in non-necrotic muscle fibers in inflammatory myopathies and muscular dystrophies where it is believed that MAC deposition may play a role in muscle damage [25]. Louboutin et al.

[26] characterized the putative role of S-protein and CD-59 in DMD and PM-two diseases where MAC deposition has been found. They showed that CD59 disappears from the sarcolemma when fiber necrosis occurs; thus, it cannot inhibit the formation of MAC as it usually does. Secondly, their results suggested that S-protein was not able to prevent the full assembly of MAC in necrotic fibers of DMD and PM patients; rather it could inactivate MAC deposition inside necrotic fibers or clear the MAC-targeted muscle fibers.

Oxidative stress

Oxidative stress has been implicated in the pathogenesis of inflammatory and noninflammatory muscle diseases. Semicarbazide-sensitive amine oxidase (SSAO) deaminates aromatic and aliphatic primary amines. In the catalytic reaction, oxygen is consumed, and hydrogen peroxide, aldehydes, and ammonia are the final products. SSAO is present in plasma and associated with mammalian tissue membranes, but it is found in very low levels in human skeletal muscle [27•]. Testing the idea that deamination is enhanced in inflammatory myopathies and that SSAO's contribution results in an additional source of oxidative stress in myopathies, Olive et al. [28] demonstrated the overexpression of SSAO in diseased skeletal muscle.

Transglutaminase 2 overexpression

Knowing that transglutaminase 2 (TGase 2) is overexpressed in sporadic inclusion body myositis (sIBM), Choi et al. [29] concluded from their prior work with sIBM that an increase in transglutaminase 2 may also be present in other inflammatory myopathies, such as PM and DM. Choi, who had previously shown aberrant expression of TGAse 2 is associated with inclusion body formation in sIBM, considered that overexpression of TGase 2 might be a universal feature of IIM. Immunocytochemistry and quantitative RT-PCR on the muscle tissue of patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) and normal controls as well as patients with PM and DM uncovered an increased level of TGAse 2 expression only in PM and DM tissues. The jump to the conclusion that TGase 2 inhibition might open a therapeutic avenue in the idiopathic inflammatory myopathies seems premature.

Autoimmunity: Jo-1

Anti-Jo-1, directed against the ubiquitous intracellular enzyme, histidyl tRNA synthetase, is the most common myositis-specific antibody. Although it is often described in concert with interstitial lung disease, it has rarely been described with concomitant malignancy. A recent report of a case of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma in a patient who was anti-Jo-1 positive [30] raises new possibilities about the source of the antigens driving myositisspecific autoantibodies, the relation of the myopathy to the associated tumor, and the order of events, since the autoantibodies and the tumor both antedate the onset of clinical myopathy.

Genetic susceptibility

Specific HLA subtypes are believed to confer increased risk for developing PM and DM. These include HLA-DRB1*03 in Caucasians and HLA-DRB1*14 in Koreans [31,32]. It is not known, however, whether this association is primary or merely represents an association with other genes in the HLA region. Hassan et al. [33] conducted a study in 65 adult patients with PM or DM to analyze associations between individual genotypes in the HLA region as well as various haplotypes including the following genetic markers: SNPs in HLA-DRB1 and TNF genes as well as microsatellite markers in TNF and MICA genes. Their observations suggested that the ancestral haplotype (A1;B8;DRB1*03) along with the TNF2 allele, as opposed to the HLA-DR3 gene itself, is an important susceptibility factor for the development of PM and DM.

Lampe et al. [34] found a significant increase in frequency of the following HLA alleles in patients with sIBM compared with normal controls: A*03, B*08, DRB1*03, and DQB1*05, with DRB1*03 having the most statistically significant increase as compared with normals. The authors contend, as others have before, that HLA typing may help to distinguish between IBM subtypes and perhaps may predict who will benefit from future therapeutic interventions.

Because of the similarities observed in the skin and muscle of patients with chronic graft versus host disease (cGVHD) and dermatomyositis, particularly juvenile DM, the pathogenesis is thought to be similar. Microchimerism-the presence of cells acquired by transplacental transfer from fetus to mother or mother to fetushas been observed in both peripheral blood and muscle cells of patients with IIM. HLA-DQA1*0501 is believed to confer increased risk for these diseases in some populations. Although HLA-DQA1*0501 has been associated with microchimerism [35], Artlett et al. [36] were unable to show that DQA1*0501 was associated with microchimerism in T lymphocytes or whole blood DNA in patients with SSc, juvenile IIM, or healthy controls. Thus, the HLADQA1 alleles do not appear to play a role in the persistence of microchimerism inpatients with autoimmune myopathies.

Inclusion body myositis

Autoimmunity

It is debated whether sIBM is primarily immunemediated; some experts, particularly neurologists, prefer the name inclusion body myopathy. A recent case describing the concomitant findings of anti-PM-SCl antibodies in a patient with IBM supports a role for autoimmunity pathogenesis of IBM [37]. In addition, IBM has been described in concert with autoimmune rheumatic diseases, albeit rarely. Most recently, the combination of SLE, Sjogren syndrome, and IBM was reported for the first time [38]. The patient had SLE for over a decade when she presented with muscle weakness. Electron microscopy demonstrated intranuclear and intracytoplasmic tubulofilamentous inclusions; the patient improved with high-dose methotrexate therapy.

Muntzing et al. [39] demonstrated the presence of clonal restriction of TCR expression in muscle-infiltrating lymphocytes in IBM. Identical T-cell clones predominate in different muscles and exist for many years, suggesting an antigen-driven inflammatory reaction in IBM.

Protein folding and trafficking

The "unfolded protein response" (UPR) is a functional mechanism whereby cells protect themselves from endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress by assuring proper folding and preventing buildup of unfolded proteins in the ER. This is accomplished with the help of molecular chaperones such as calnexin, calreticulin, GRP94, BiP/GRP78, and ERp72. Expression and immunolocalization of these proteins was studied in patients with sIBM and controls, and in amyloid-␤-precursor protein (AßPP) overexpressing cultured human muscle fibers [40]. All five ER chaperones physically associated with A␤lPP in sIBM muscle, implying that they may play a role in AßPP folding and processing.

The lysosomal system of muscle fibers may also play a critical role in rimmed vacuole formation [41]. Work by Kumamoto et al. [42] showed that the transport of newly synthesized lysosomal enzymes via the Golgi apparatus and autophagic vacuole formation in the lysosome system is activated in sIBM. This was demonstrated by the observation of clathrin and M6PR, which facilitate receptor-mediated intracellular transport inside rimmed vacuoles and in the sarcoplasm of vacuolated or nonvacuolated fibers, but not in control specimens. PrP Sc , a hallmark of prion diseases such as spongiform encephalopathies, was demonstrated to be a prominent constituent in sporadic IBM muscle tissue of a patient with concomitant Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD) [43]. The existence of muscle disease in subtypes of CJD may deserve further systematic investigation, as distinct glycotyopes of PrSc may be present in muscle and brain. The muscle glycotype in this case report resembled that found in vCJD brain.

Although it is attractive to connect vacuolar trafficking abnormalities of glycoproteins to IBM because of the known genetic lesion in one type of hereditary IBM (see below), for the moment, it seems safest to consider these observations as evidence of yet another group of proteins being trapped in IBM inclusions.

The genetic absence of GNE activity leads to muscle weakness in hereditary inclusion body myositis (HIBM), perhaps by interfering with the trafficking of glycoproteins. Huizing et al. [44•] examined the glycosylation status of ␣-dystroglycan (a central protein of skeletal muscle dystrophin) in muscle biopsies of four HIBM patients and found absent or markedly reduced ␣-dystroglycans using antibodies specific for ␤-dystoglycan and laminin ␣-2. They suggest that HIBM may therefore be a "dystroglycanopathy," similar to the process in congenital muscular dystrophies-perhaps providing one mechanism for the muscle weakness of HIBM patients.

In an important series of observations, inflammation has now been clearly recognized in hereditary IBM. Yabe et al. [45••] reported two cases of distal myopathy with rimmed vacuoles (DMRV) in a Japanese family in which inflammation (an unusual feature of DMRV) was present as well as a compound heterozygous mutation in their GNE gene. Mutations associated with DMRV in this study were localized to the kinase domain. An additional novel homozygous mutation was discovered in a nonJewish Iranian population with quadriceps-sparing myopathy consistent with adult onset hIBM: G-to-A mutation in exon 7 changing valine to isoleucine in the epimerase domain of GNE [46]. Muscle inflammation was present in this case as well.

These important observations blur the boundary between purely hereditary and sporadic IBM, in particular by raising the possibility that the inflammation seen in apparently sporadic IBM might be a downstream secondary event following damage induced by as-yet unrecognized genetic mutations.

The Middle East cluster of hIBM is the result of a founder mutation with incomplete penetrance and is not limited only to the Jewish population. One hundred twenty-nine patients in 55 families with a known history of hIBM were homozygous for the M712T mutation, initially described as the "Persian Jewish Mutation" [47]. Argov et al. [47] have found that the phenotypic spectrum is wider than initially thought. In a study by Del Bo et al., genetic analysis of the GNE gene in an Italian family with autosomal recessive h-IBM demonstrated two novel mutations: a heterozygous deletion involving exons 1-9 and the missense R162C mutation [48]. The quadriceps weakness was apparently distinct from that found in the quadriceps sparing nonPersian Jewish families with a different GNE mutation.

Hereditary IBM with early-onset Paget disease of bone and frontotemporal dementia (IBMPFD) is a rare form of hereditary myopathy. Its clinical attributes distinguish it from the other forms of hIBM linked to chromosome 9.

Watts et al. [49] found no relation of GNE mutations with IBMPFD, confirming genetic heterogeneity with IBM2.

Other genetic evidence

The muscle morphology in X-EDMD is not pathognomonic; rather, there are nonspecific myopathic changes including endomysial connective tissue proliferation, fiber splitting, type II fiber predominance, and type I fiber atrophy. A recent paper reported the co-existence of x-linked Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) and IBM [50]. Thus typical IBM morphologic features may be found in other neuromuscular disorders.

Conclusion

Although the pathogenesis of the inflammatory myopathies remains obscure, great strides over the past year have placed us closer to understanding the etiologies of these diverse disease entities. We have deepened our understanding that although these diseases may share some components of the clinical phenotype as well as some serologic similarities, they differ on a molecular and cellular level. The inflammatory myopathies result from a combination of interactions between environmental and genetic risk factors, and the need for definitive, safer therapeutic options in inflammatory myopathies makes the search for defining detailed pathogenesis of inflammation and muscle fiber damage at the molecular level essential.

References and recommended reading

Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:

•

Of special interest Another nicely studied series with a relatively high incidence of lung involvement. It seems likely that there will turn out to be common microenvironmental factors in the lungs and the skeletal muscle to account for the high prevalence of concomitant pathology and the autoantibodies-directed to aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases-found in patients with both lung and muscle involvement.

12 De Bleecker J, Vervaet V, Van 

den Bergh P: Necrotizing myopathy with microvascular deposition of the complement membrane attack complex. Clin Neuropathol 2004, 23:76-79. The papers of Bronner[11]  and De Bleecker resemble earlier observations on the necrotizing myopathy with little or no inflammation seen in patients with anti-SRP autoantibodies. •• 13 Okada S, Weatherhead E, Targoff IN, et al.: Global surface ultraviolet radiation intensity may modulate the clinical and immunologic expression of autoimmune muscle disease. Arthritis Rheum 2003, 48:2285-2293. A group of clinicians from around the around the world with expertise in myositis joined together by Dr. Fred Miller and his colleagues in the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences at NIH have made an excellent advance in providing a plausible model for how an environmental factor might influence the phenotype of a disease with a strong genetic component. Their success depended upon starting with a good hypothesis. 14 Werth VP, Bashir M, Zhang W: Photosensitivity in rheumatic diseases. J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc 2004, 9:57-63. 15 Kuru S, Inukai A, Kato T, et al.: Expression of tumor necrosis factor-alpha in regenerating muscle fibers in inflammatory and non-inflammatory myopathies. Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 2003, 105:217-224. 16 Hengstman GJ, van den Hoogen FH, Barrera P, et al.: Successful treatment of dermatomyositis and polymyositis with anti-tumor-necrosis-factor-alpha: preliminary observations. Eur Neurol 2003, 50:10-15. 17 Musial J, Undas A, Celinska-Lowenhoff M: Polymyositis associated with infliximab treatment for rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2003, 42:1566-1568. • 18 Wiendl H, Mitsdoerffer M, Schneider D, et al.: Human muscle cells express a B7-related molecule, B7-H1, with strong negative immune regulatory potential: a novel mechanism of counterbalancing the immune attack in idiopathic inflammatory myopathies. FASEB J 2003, 17:1892-1894. This is a follow-up of important earlier observations on this newly recognized costimulatory path. • 19 Wiendl H, Mitsdoerffer M, Schneider D, et al.: Muscle fibres and cultured muscle cells express the B7.1/2-related inducible co-stimulatory molecule, ICOSL: implications for the pathogenesis of inflammatory myopathies. Brain 2003, 126:1026-1035. Another possibly important co-stimulatory pair identified by this group adds expected complexity to the picture of pathogenesis. 20 van der Pas J, Hengstman GJ, ter Laak HJ, et al.: Diagnostic value of MHC class I staining in idiopathic inflammatory myopathies. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2004, 75:136-139. 21 Civatte M, Schleinitz N, Krammer P, et al.: Class I MHC detection as a diagnostic tool in noninformative muscle biopsies of patients suffering from dermatomyositis (DM). Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 2003, 29:546-552. 22 De Paepe B, Schroder JM, Martin JJ, et al.: Localization of the alphachemokine SDF-1 and its receptor CXCR4 in idiopathic inflammatory myopathies. Neuromuscul Disord 2004, 14:265-273. •• 23 Hofbauer M, Wiesener S, Babbe H, et al.: Clonal tracking of autoaggressive T cells in polymyositis by combining laser microdissection, single-cell PCR, and CDR3-spectratype analysis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:4090-4095. An impressive array of highly sensitive techniques have been brought together to explore important questions about individual immune cells that inhabit the inflammatory lesions in myositis. A tour de force.

Despite the apparent remoteness of this parasite-induced disease from the apparently autoimmune pathology of human idiopathic inflammatory myopathy, this model mimics the pathologic picture closer than most others. It may, however, prove too remote and unfamiliar to be attractive to other investigators.••Of outstanding interest1Andersson J, Englund P, Sunnemark D, et al.: CBA/J mice infected with Try-••panosoma cruzi: an experimental model for inflammatory myopathies. MuscleNerve 2003, 27:442-448.2Smith RD, Konoplev S, DeCourten-Myers G, Brown T: West Nile virus en-cephalitis with myositis and orchitis. Hum Pathol 2004, 35:254-258.3Petersen LR, Marfin AA: West Nile virus: a primer for the clinician. Ann InternMed 2002, 137:173-179.4Douche-Aourik F, Berlier W, Feasson L, et al.: Detection of enterovirus inhuman skeletal muscle from patients with chronic inflammatory muscle dis-ease or fibromyalgia and healthy subjects. J Med Virol 2003, 71:540-547.5Leff RL, Love LA, Miller FW, et al.: Viruses in idiopathic inflammatory myopa-thies: absence of candidate viral genomes in muscle. Lancet 1992,339:1192-1195.6Chevrel G, Borsotti JP, Miossec P: Lack of evidence for a direct involvementof muscle infection by parvovirus B19 in the pathogenesis of inflammatorymyopathies: a follow-up study. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2003, 42:349-352.7Fathi M, Dastmalchi M, Rasmussen E, et al.: Interstitial lung disease, a com-•mon manifestation of newly diagnosed polymyositis and dermatomyositis.Ann Rheum Dis 2004, 63:297-301.A fine report of a large experience with a remarkably high proportion of patients withlung involvement.• 8 Schnabel A, Reuter M, Biederer J, et al.: Interstitial lung disease in polymyositis and dermatomyositis: clinical course and response to treatment. Semin Arthritis Rheum 2003, 32:273-284.

