Age- and region-dependent alterations in Aβ-degrading enzymes: implications for Aβ-induced disorders

Accumulation of amyloid ␤-protein (A␤) is a fundamental feature of certain human brain disorders such as Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Down syndrome and also of the skeletal muscle disorder inclusion body myositis (IBM). Emerging evidence suggests that the steadystate levels of A␤ are determined by the balance between production and degradation. Although the proteolytic processes leading to A␤ formation have been extensively studied, less is known about the proteases that degrade A␤, which include insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE) and neprilysin (NEP). Here we measured the steady-state levels of these proteases as a function of age and brain/muscle region in mice and humans. In the hippocampus, which is vulnerable to AD pathology, IDE and NEP steady-state levels diminish as function of age. By contrast, in the cerebellum, a brain region not marked by significant A␤ accumulation, NEP and IDE levels either increase or remain unaltered during aging. Moreover, the steady-state levels of IDE and NEP are significantly higher in the cerebellum compared to the cortex and hippocampus. We further show that IDE is more oxidized in the hippocampus compared to the cerebellum of AD patients. In muscle, we find differential levels of IDE and NEP in fast versus slow twitch muscle fibers that varies with aging. These findings suggest that age-and region-specific changes in the proteolytic clearance of A␤ represent a critical pathogenic mechanism that may account for the susceptibility of particular brain or muscle regions in AD and IBM.

Introduction

Brain and skeletal muscle are the only two human tissues where accumulation of the amyloid ␤-protein (A␤) protein is known to have clinicopathological consequences. Accrual of A␤ occurs in selective brain regions in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and in related disorders such as Down syndrome or hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis [30]. Accumulation of the A␤ peptide also occurs in the age-related muscle disorder inclusion body myositis (IBM), a paralytic condition for which there is no known cure [1,19]. In certain cohorts of patients, A␤ accumulation is known to occur either as a result of increased expression of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) such as in Down syndrome and IBM [28], or from APP misprocessing induced by mutations in genes associated with familial AD [32]. For the remaining cases, however, age-and region-related changes in A␤ clearance may also be part of the underlying pathogenic mechanism. Even in transgenic mice overexpressing high APP levels during early stages of life (see, for example, [23]), A␤ deposits typically develop in a progressive and age-related fashion, supporting the hypothesis that accumulation is dependent on the balance between production and clearance-based mechanisms.

Several proteases have recently been shown to play a role in regulating steady-state levels of cerebral A␤, and among these, insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE) and neprilysin (NEP) have shown the largest effect and have received the most experimental confirmation [31]. IDE, also called insulysin, is a ∼110 kDa thiol metallo-endopeptidase that degrades small peptides such as insulin and A␤ [31]. An unbiased screen of the conditioned medium of neuronal and non-neuronal cell lines for the ability to degrade naturally secreted A␤ led to the identification of IDE as a major protease that degrades extracellular A␤ [25,26]. Emerging genetic evidence suggests that IDE is linked to some late-onset familial AD cases [3,5,8,21,24], although pathogenic mutations have yet to be identified. Neuronal overexpression of IDE suffices to reduce A␤ levels and greatly retard cerebral plaque formation in transgenic mice expressing high levels of APP with the Swedish and Indiana mutations, and the reduction in cerebral A␤ levels is even able to rescue the premature lethality present in this model [17]. By contrast, mice with a homozygous deletion of the IDE gene show a 50% decrease in A␤ degradation in both brain membrane fractions and cultured primary neurons, along with an increase in endogenous A␤ in the brain [9,20]. Moreover, besides degrading A␤, IDE also degrades the APP intracellular domain (AICD), the other ␥-secretase-generated product of APP [7,9].

NEP, a membrane-anchored zinc endopeptidase, is another A␤-degrading protease that has been extensively studied. The injection of radiolabeled A␤ 1-42 into the hippocampi of two-month-old rats in the presence or absence of various protease inhibitors indicated that NEP is a major A␤ 42degrading enzyme [14]. Whereas IDE exclusively degrades soluble monomeric but not oligomeric A␤ species [25], NEP is capable of degrading monomeric and oligomeric A␤ [15]. NEP-deficient mice show a significant dose-dependent increase in cerebral A␤ levels, suggesting that even a partial reduction of NEP levels can lead to a buildup of A␤ [13]. This hypothesis is further strengthened by data indicating that NEP levels are reduced in the peripheral organs compared to the brain and within the AD brain NEP levels are lower in high plaques areas [36,37]. Conversely, overexpression of NEP in vitro and in vivo leads to a reduction in cerebral A␤ levels in a dose-dependent manner [10,11,17,18].

To assess the potential role that IDE and NEP may play in the pathogenesis of A␤-induced disorders, we analyzed their steady-state levels during aging in different brain and muscle regions. Here we report that the levels of these catabolic enzymes change differentially in brain regions more susceptible to A␤ accumulation as compared to the cerebellum, which is usually devoid of extensive A␤ deposits. We further show that IDE and NEP levels are higher in the cerebellum of humans and mice relative to the hippocampus and cortex. IDE function in the hippocampus may be further limited in the aging brain, as we detect more oxidized IDE in this brain region compared to the cerebellum of AD patients. Given the critical role that IDE and NEP play in regulating A␤ degradation, and by extension, disease progression, our findings suggest that region-and age-specific changes in their levels may account for the sensitivity and resistance of certain brain and muscle regions to A␤ accumulation.

Materials and methods

Protein extractions

C57BL6/129 and 3xTg-AD mice [23] were sacrificed by CO 2 asphyxiation. Brain (hippocampus, cortex, and cerebellum) and muscle (WMG, plantaris, and soleus) were isolated under a dissecting microscope and snap frozen on dry ice. Human AD and control brains were obtained from the Brain Tissue Repository of the Institute for Aging and Dementia (University of California, Irvine). Tissue was homogenized in 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0 containing 0.7 mg/ml Pepstatin A supplemented with a complete mini protease inhibitor tablet (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). The homogenized mixes were briefly sonicated to sheer the DNA and centrifuged at 4 • C for 1 h at 100,000 × g. The supernatant containing the cytoplasmic fraction was stored at −80 • C until used. The pellet was re-homogenized in a solution of 10 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl (TBS) and 2% Triton containing a complete mini protease inhibitor tablet and centrifuged at 4 • C for 1 h at 100,000 × g. The supernatant, now containing the membrane fraction, was stored at −80 • C until used.

Immunoblot

NEP and IDE were resolved by 10% bis-tris SDS/PAGE (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) under reducing conditions and transferred to nitrocellulose membrane. The membrane was incubated in a 5% solution of non-fat dry milk for 1 h at 25 • C. After overnight incubation at 4 • C with primary antibody, the blots were washed in 0.1% Tween-TBS (T-TBS) for 20 min and incubated for 1 h at 25 • C with the appropriate species-specific biotinylated secondary antibody. The blots were washed in T-TBS for 20 min and incubated for 5 min with Super Signal (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). For quantification purposes, the blots were scanned on the Storm system 840 for chemiluminescence, and densitometric analysis was carried out with ImageQuant software (Amersham Bioscience, Piscataway, NJ, USA). The intensity levels of IDE and NEP were then normalized to ␤-actin.

Co-immunoprecipitation

The hippocampus and cerebellum from AD brains were homogenized in 1× STEN buffer pH 7.6 (300 mM NaCl, 100 mM Tris, 4 mM EDTA, 0.4% NP-40) and incubated for 1 h at 4 • C with protein G (Invitrogen) to diminish any nonspecific interactions. Samples were briefly centrifuged and the resulting supernatant was incubated and rotated overnight at 4 • C with primary antibody in the presence of protein G and protein A. After brief centrifugation at 4 • C, the beads were washed sequentially for 10 min each with 0.5× STEN, 1× STEN, and 0.1% SDS-STEN. After the final wash, the samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 18,000 × g, re-suspended in loading buffer, boiled for 10 min, and separated on a 10% bis-tris gel as described above.

Antibodies

The following antibodies were used: anti-NEP (Abcam, Cambridge, UK), applied at dilution of 1:100; anti-IDE1 and anti-IDE 9B12 (gifts from Dr. Selkoe), applied at dilution of 1:5000 and 1:100, respectively); anti-actin (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA), applied at dilution of 1:15,000. Anti-HNE (Calbiochem, La Jolla, CA, USA), applied at dilution of 1:500.

Immunohistochemistry

Paraformaldehyde-fixed human AD tissue was obtained from the Brain Tissue Repository of the Institute for Aging and Dementia (University of California, Irvine). Free-Fig. 1. Temporal and spatial changes in IDE and NEP steady-state levels in the murine brain. The steady-state levels of IDE and NEP were measured by quantitative Western blotting of brain extracts from 2-and 18-month-old wild-type mice (n = 5/timepoint). The hippocampus and cerebral cortex were analyzed because these regions are vulnerable to AD-neuropathology, and the cerebellum selected because it is largely refractory to A␤ pathology. Panels A and B show that the steady-state levels of IDE and NEP significantly decrease as function of age in the hippocampus (p-value = 0.0042 for IDE and 0.0455 for NEP). NEP levels are not changed in the 2-and 18-month-old cortex (p-value = 0.876, panel D), whereas IDE levels significantly increase with aging (p-value = 0.0210, panel C). In the cerebellum, NEP levels (panel F) significantly increase with aging (p-value = 0.0410), whereas IDE were slightly higher but did not reach statistical significance (p-value = 0.2239, panel E).

floating sections (50 m thick) were prepared using a vibratome slicing system. The endogenous peroxidase activity was quenched for 30 min in H 2 O 2 and the sections were subsequently incubated in 90% formic acid for 7 min to expose the epitope. Sections were then incubated overnight at 4 • C with the appropriate primary antibody. Sections were reacted with secondary antibody followed by development with diaminobenzidine (DAB) substrate using the avidin-biotin horseradish peroxidase system (Vector Labs, UK).

Statistic analysis

Anova analysis was performed on the data as well as Fisher's PLSD post hoc test using Stat View software (SAS institute, Cary, NC). Fig. 2. Steady-state levels of IDE and NEP are higher in the cerebellum compared to the hippocampus and cortex. We measured IDE and NEP levels by Western blot in the cerebellum, cortex and hippocampus from 18-month-old wild-type mice (n = 3). Panel A shows that IDE levels are significantly higher in the cerebellum compared to the cortex (p-value < 0.0001) and the hippocampus (p-value < 0.0001). IDE levels in the hippocampus were also significantly reduced compared to the cortex (p-value = 0.0023). Panel B shows a representative immunoblot comparing relative levels of IDE in the cerebellum, cortex, and hippocampus. All measurements were normalized to ␤-actin. Panel C shows that NEP levels are significantly higher in the cerebellum compared to the hippocampus (p-value = 0.0154). NEP levels in the cortex were also lowered compared to the cerebellum, but did not reach statistical significance (p-value = 0.1258). Panel D shows a representative immunoblot comparing relative levels of NEP in the cerebellum, cortex, and hippocampus.

Results

Temporal and spatial modulation of IDE and NEP in mouse and human brain

It is well-established that the hippocampus and the cortex are two brain areas highly susceptible to A␤ accumulation in AD, whereas the cerebellum is usually spared. To determine if regional differences in the levels of the proteases that degrade A␤ might contribute to this differential accumulation, we analyzed IDE and NEP levels in the cerebellum, cortex, and hippocampus from wild-type and transgenic mice and from human AD patients and controls.

In the hippocampus, we found that IDE and NEP steadystate levels significantly decreased during aging in wildtype mice (Fig. 1A and B). A similar age-dependent decrease in NEP levels in the hippocampus has been previously reported [12]. Surprisingly, in the cortex, we found no significant differences in NEP levels but observed an agedependent increase in IDE levels. (Fig. 1C and D). In contrast, in the cerebellum, NEP levels increase significantly during aging, whereas no age-related changes were apparent for IDE (Fig. 1E and F).

Because the cerebral cortex is susceptible to A␤ accumulation, it is plausible that either other enzymes play a more important role in degrading A␤ in this region and/or other factors are involved. For example, although IDE levels increase with aging in the cortex, it is still possible that the steady-state levels of this enzyme in aged mice are lower in this region compared to resistant areas such as the cerebellum. Consequently, we compared IDE steady-state levels in the cerebellum, cortex and hippocampus by quantitative immunoblot. We found that the steady-state levels of IDE are significantly higher in the cerebellum compared to the cortex and hippocampus (Fig. 2A and B). Likewise, NEP levels parallel these results (Fig. 2C). Therefore, not only do the levels of these proteases decrease with aging in the hippocampus, while increasing in the cerebellum, but we found that the relative steady-state levels are highest in the cerebellum of aged mice.

In the AD brain, several studies have found that NEP levels are reduced in region susceptible to A␤ accumulation compared to spared regions [15,27,36,37], and there is less expression in the vasculature as well [4]. It is yet to be established, however, whether the same is true for IDE. To address this question, we analyzed IDE levels in AD and age-matched human control brains (Table 1). As with the mouse analysis, we focused on three brain regions: two areas that are particularly vulnerable to AD-neuropathology, the hippocampus and cerebral cortex, and one region, the cerebellum, which is largely refractory to this pathology. Although there was a trend for lower IDE levels in all three regions from AD sub-Fig. 3. Region-specific changes in IDE steady-state levels in human control and AD subjects correlate with A␤ load. IDE steady-state levels were measured by Western blot from brain extracts from human control and AD patients (n = 5/group). As with the mouse analysis, we focused on two brain regions that contain extensive A␤ deposits, the hippocampus and cerebral cortex, as well as the cerebellum, which generally lacks extensive A␤ deposits. Panels A-C compare IDE levels in the cerebellum, cortex and hippocampus between human control and AD brains. Although IDE levels were lowered in AD brains compared to human controls, statistical significance was not achieved (p-value = 0.0661 for A; 0.1137 for B; 0.3078 for C). Panels D and E compared IDE levels in the cerebellum, cortex and hippocampus of human control and AD patients (n = 5/group). As in the mouse, we find that in the non-demented brain, the steady-state levels of IDE are significantly higher in the cerebellum compared to the cortex (p-value = 0.0067) and the hippocampus (p-value = 0.0064). In the AD brain, IDE levels were also higher in the cerebellum compared to the cortex (p-value = 0.0343) although the hippocampus levels are not significantly different from the cerebellum (p-value = 0.2149). Panel F shows the mean amyloid load in the cerebellum, cortex and hippocampus of the five AD cases studied here. Note that the A␤ load is significantly higher in the cortex and hippocampus compared to the cerebellum (p-value < 0.0001 and 0.0027, respectively). The A␤ load in the cortex was also higher compared to the hippocampus (p-value = 0.0044). Panels G-I show representative photographs of A␤ staining in these three brain regions. Note the paucity of A␤ immunostaining in the cerebellum. Fig. 4. IDE levels are lower in the hippocampus compared to the cerebellum of 3xTg-AD mice. IDE levels were measured by Western blot of the cerebellum and hippocampus of 18-month-old 3xTg-AD hemizygous and homozygous mice (n = 5/group). Panels A and B show that IDE levels were significantly lower in the hippocampus compared to the cerebellum (p-value = 0.039 and 0.0163 for hemizygous and homozygous mice, respectively). Panel C shows that IDE levels are not statistically significant between NonTg, and 3xTg-AD hemizygous or homozygous mice (p-values = 0.3647 and 0.4374, respectively); likewise, no significant differences were apparent between hemizygous and homozygous (p-value = 0.8866). Panel D shows that IDE levels are significantly lower in the hippocampus of 3xTg-AD homozygous mice compared to hemizygous and NonTg (p-values = 0.021 and 0.019, respectively). No statistical significance was detected between NonTg and hemizygous (p-value = 0.8868).

jects compared to the control, the results did not achieve statistical significance (Fig. 3A-C). Consequently, we directly compared the steady-state levels of IDE in the cerebellum, cortex, and hippocampus from both AD and human controls (Fig. 3D and E). We found that IDE levels are significantly lower in the hippocampus and cortex compared to the cerebellum in the non-demented human brain (Fig. 3D). Likewise, in the AD brain we found highest IDE levels in the cerebellum (Fig. 3E). Therefore, in both mice and humans, IDE and NEP levels are highest in the cerebellum, perhaps partially accounting for the paucity of A␤ deposits in this region. To further corroborate the association between A␤ deposition and IDE levels, we determined the A␤ load in the cerebellum, cortex and hippocampus of the five AD cases studied here. This analysis was necessary to determine whether the AD cases studied here showed diffuse plaques in the cerebellum.

Our findings indicated that the A␤ load was markedly lower in the cerebellum compared to the cortex and hippocampus (Fig. 3F-I). Therefore, the lack of A␤ deposits in the cerebellum of these human cases correlates with the higher IDE levels observed in this region.

To further explore the effect of the amyloid load on IDE levels, we utilized a triple transgenic model of AD (3xTg-AD) developed in our laboratory that is marked by both plaque and tangle pathology [23]. These mice were derived by coinjecting human APPswe and tau P301L transgenes into singlecell embryos harvested from mutant PS1 knockin mice. We were able to breed the mice to homozygosity, thereby doubling the expression levels of APP and tau, and further show that the homozygous mice develop pathology earlier and more extensively than hemizygous mice making it possible to study dose-dependent effects [22]. Numerous extracellular and thioflavin S positive deposits are present in the cortex and hippocampus of 18-month-old hemizygous and homozygous 3xTg-AD mice, whereas no A␤ deposits are detected in the cerebellum at any age studied [23]. To determine whether changes in the amyloid burden modulate IDE levels, we compared IDE levels in the cerebellum and the hippocampus from 18-month-old 3xTg-AD mice. We found that IDE levels were significantly lower in the hippocampus compared to the cerebellum, paralleling the results observed in wild-type mice and in the AD brain (Fig. 4A and B). We next compared the steady-state levels of IDE between the NonTg, 3xTg-AD hemizygous and homozygous mice. No significant changes were detected between the cerebella of these mice (Fig. 4C), however, a significant decrease was detected in the hippocampus of homozygous mice (Fig. 4D). Therefore, although the substrate for these enzymes is elevated (i.e., there is more A␤), there does not appear to be a compensatory increase in IDE levels.

IDE is more oxidized in the hippocampus than the cortex of AD patients

Oxidative damage is considered a prominent characteristic of aging that can affect protein structure and function. Previous reports have shown that 4-hydroxynonenal (HNE) can covalently modify proteins in the AD brain [16,29,35]. It has already been reported that NEP is more oxidized in AD brains compared to controls, suggesting that oxidative damage to NEP may play a role in A␤ deposition [34]. To determine if IDE is also oxidized in AD brains and if its oxidation occurs in brain regions susceptible to A␤ deposition, we performed co-immunoprecipitation experiments using antibodies against 4-HNE and IDE. Our results show for the first time that IDE is oxidized in the AD brain, and there is more oxidized IDE in the hippocampus compared to the cerebellum (Fig. 5). The steady-state levels of IDE in the hippocampus of AD brains were lower compared to the cerebellum, but did not reach statistical significance. However, a significant proportion of IDE is oxidized (Fig. 5C), suggesting that this enzyme might be less effective at degrading A␤ in this brain region compared to the cerebellum. It remains to be established if the oxidation of IDE impairs its activity or enhances its turnover, thereby accounting for the lower levels we observed. Alternatively, it is also possible that A␤ increases protein oxidation, which could account for the increased oxidation observed in an A␤-enriched regions. In this regard, it is relevant to point out that IDE has been localized to senile plaques [2], and it would be interesting to determine if IDE found in these plaques is also oxidized.

Temporal and spatial modulation of IDE and NEP in murine muscle

Because A␤ can also induce pathology in skeletal muscle, leading to inclusion body myositis [1,33], we determined whether NEP and IDE steady-state levels change as a function of age in murine muscle. Skeletal muscle is comprised of fast and slow twitched fibers, and for this analysis, we harvested predominantly fast and slow twitch muscle to determine if there was a differential effect between these two fiber types. Protein extracts were prepared from the soleus, plantaris, and the white medial gastrocnemius (WMG). We found that in the plantaris, mostly composed of fast twitch fibers, IDE and NEP levels increase during aging (Fig. 6A and B). Likewise, higher NEP levels were found in the WMG, also Fig. 5. High proportion of oxidized IDE in the hippocampus. Coimmunoprecipitation was used to determine whether IDE is oxidized in AD brains. In panel A, protein extracts were first immunoprecipitated with an anti-HNE antibody, separated and blotted, and probed with an IDE antibody. These data show that there is consistently more oxidized IDE present in the hippocampus compared to the cerebellum of AD brains. The figure shows a representative Western blot of proteins immunoprecipitated from the cerebellum and hippocampus of three AD patients. The co-immunoprecipitation experiments were repeated three times with different patients and consistent results were always obtained. In panel B, protein extracts were first immunoprecipitated with an anti-IDE antibody. Samples were then equally loaded in two separate gels, blotted and probed with an anti-IDE antibody and anti-HNE antibody, respectively. This allowed us to calculate the relative ratio of oxidized IDE over total IDE present in the hippocampus and cerebellum, which was determined by dividing the intensity levels of the HNE blot with the corresponding levels of the IDE blot. The results from this analysis are shown in panel C. mainly composed of fast twitch fibers, whereas no changes were apparent for IDE (Fig. 6C and D). Conversely, in the soleus, which is mostly composed of slow twitch fibers, NEP levels were significantly reduced in older mice, whereas IDE levels were marginally lower (Fig. 6E and F). Therefore, not only do the levels of these catabolic enzymes change in a region-specific fashion in the brain during aging, but they are also modulated differentially in skeletal muscle fibers. It is presently unknown whether there is selective vulnerability to A␤ deposition in skeletal muscle in IBM patients, but our data suggest that this issue warrants further exploration.

Discussion

In this study, we show age-and region-related alterations in the levels of two major A␤-degrading enzymes in both brain and skeletal muscle. We specifically report the following key observations: (i) IDE and NEP levels decrease in the hippocampus with aging and are elevated in the cerebellum of older mice, (ii) IDE and NEP levels are significantly higher in the cerebellum compared to AD vulnerable regions such as the hippocampus and cortex in both mice and humans, (iii) IDE is more oxidized in the hippocampus compared to the cerebellum of AD patients, and (iv) In skeletal muscle, IDE and NEP levels change also in an age-and regional-dependent fashion.

AD and IBM are the most common age-related A␤-related disorders of brain and muscle, respectively. A key and unresolved issue concerning these degenerative conditions relates to the underlying factors that account for the development of these diseases in an age-dependent manner. This is true, for example, not only for the sporadic cases of AD, but also for the familial cases as well. Moreover, another critical matter, at least for AD, relates to the molecular factors that underlie the vulnerability of selective brain regions for accumulating A␤. Some of the findings of this study may help to shed light on these issues, and highlight the adverse impact of aging on key components of the clearance process in brain and mus-cle of humans and mice. Therefore, clearance mechanisms that become inefficient or inactive (perhaps due to oxidative damage) with aging have the potential to dramatically affect the levels of A␤ in tissue, eventually leading to a disease state. Furthermore, our results may partially account for the vulnerability of particular regions (such as the hippocampus) to accumulate A␤ and explain why other regions are more refractory.

This study focused on NEP and IDE, however, there are other A␤-degrading proteases that may also play a physiological role in this process as well. The list of proteases capable of degrading A␤ continues to grow and includes endothelin converting enzyme [6] as well as others (see [31] for review), and it will be necessary to determine if these other proteases are also modulated during aging. As our data provide evidence for age-related alterations in the two key regulators of A␤ clearance, IDE and NEP, it suggests that pharmacological or gene therapy approaches that upregulate the activity or level of these proteases may have therapeutic value in reversing their age-related decline, and consequently, lead to increased A␤ clearance and slow or halt disease progression. In this regard, it is notable that lentiviral mediated gene transfer of neprilysin reduces A␤ load in transgenic mice [18], suggesting that this approach may also be feasible in humans.

Acknowledgments

We thank Dr. Dennis Selkoe for the anti-IDE antibodies and the Institute for Brain Aging and Dementia (University of California, Irvine) for the postmortem AD and control brain specimens. This work was supported by grants to FML from the Alzheimer's Association and by the National Institutes of Health (AG26175 and AG0212982).

Fig. 6 .6Fig. 6. Temporal and spatial changes in IDE and NEP levels in murine muscle. The steady-state levels of IDE and NEP were measured by quantitative Western blot in muscle fibers extracted from 2-and 18-month-old wild-type mice (n = 5/timepoint). Fast twitch muscle fibers (plantaris and WMG) and a slow twitch fiber (soleus) were surveyed. Panels A and B show that the steady-state levels of IDE and NEP significantly increase as function of age in the plantaris (p-value = 0.0333 for IDE and 0.0218 for NEP). In WMG, IDE levels do not change with age (p-value = 0.8871, panel C), although NEP levels significantly increase (p-value = 0.0071, panel D). In the soleus NEP levels significantly decrease as a function of age (p-value = 0.0378, panel F) whereas IDE do not change (p-value = 0.1939, panel E).

Table 11Human brains used for IDE analysisUCI caseDiagnosisBraak stageAgeSexPMI (H)17-99ADV77F2.818-97ADV79M2.7530-96ADV80M1.549-97ADV78F1.7542-97ADV74M2.515-02ControlII85M220-01ControlIII86M3.240-96ControlI77F7.2540-93ControlII80F341-93ControlII70F3.5

