Cholesterol homeostasis failure as a unifying cause of synaptic degeneration

We previously showed that fine tuning of neural cholesterol dynamics is essential for basic synapse function, plasticity and behavior. Significant experimental evidence indicates that cholinergic function, ionotropic and metabotropic receptor machinery, excessive tau phosphorylation, the change of amyloid beta (Abeta or Ah) biochemistry, neural oxidative stress reactions, and other features of neurodegeneration also depend on fine tuning of brain cholesterol homeostasis. This evidence suggest that (i) cholesterol homeostasis break is the unifying primary cause of sporadic and familial Alzheimer's disease (AD), neuromuscular diseases (particularly inclusion-body myositis), Niemann-Pick's type C disease and Down syndrome, and (ii) explains the overlap of neurodegenerative hallmarks across the spectrum of neurodegenerative diseases. Provided is evidence-based explanation of why extremely rare (but scientifically popular) cases of AD associated with mutations in amyloid beta protein precursor (APP) and presenilin (PS) genes, are translated into the disorder via membrane cholesterol sensitivity of APP processing by secretases and Ah generation. The reciprocal effect of Ah on cholesterol synthesis, cellular uptake, efflux and esterification is summarized, as well as the potential implication of such biological function for the compensatory Ah-assisted restoration of the synaptic long-term potentiation (LTP) and resulting inability of tackling amyloid to cure AD.

1. Cholesterol and synaptic plasticity 1.1. Experimental system of acute modulation of hippocampal cholesterol One of the specific aims of our study was to gain basic knowledge on the role of cholesterol in synaptic plasticity. We first used naive albino Wistar rats ex-vivo hippocampal slices for acute modulation of tissue cholesterol dynamics, followed by the study of slices electrophysiology and immunohistochemistry [1,2].

Experimental design

The experimental design included dissection of rat hippocampus, preparation of thin slices (of about 0.5 mm thickness), slices' maintenance in oxygenated artificial cerebrospinal fluid, incubation of slices with model or natural cholesterol acceptors that increase cellular cholesterol efflux thus modeling increased cholesterol dynamics. The above procedures were followed by electrophysiology or immunostaining and immunofluorescent analysis. We also performed detailed analysis of cholesterol efflux summarized below.

Biochemical analysis of cholesterol dynamics in slices

We used HDL3, high-density lipoproteins 3, prepared from normal human cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and methylh-cyclodextrine. Both are capable to sequester cholesterol 0022-510X/$ -see front matter D 2004 Published by Elsevier B.V. doi:10.1016/j.jns. 2004.11.036 in their hydrophobic core thereby greatly enhancing cholesterol removal from cells and modeling increased cholesterol dynamics. Biochemical analysis of the efflux included radioactive labeling of slices with tritiated cholesterol before incubation with cholesterol acceptors. We found that 6 h incubation with HDL3 (4 Ag/ml by protein) or methyl-h-cyclodextrine (5 mM) cause significant efflux of cholesterol, roughly 30% and 70%, respectively [1].

Cyclodextrine was potent to cause significant efflux of 11% hippocampal cholesterol also at lower concentration (2.5 mM) and short 20 min incubation time [1]. We also analyzed phospholipid efflux by labeling slices with radioactive choline, incorporating mostly into phosphatydilcholine. We found appreciable efflux of 7% hippocampal phospholipids only during 6 h incubation with 5 mM cyclodextrine co-featuring the efflux of 70% hippocampal cholesterol.

Fluorescent analysis of cholesterol dynamics in slices

Fluorescent analysis of cholesterol in slices was performed after the staining of sections with cholesterol binding compound filipin. The analysis was focused on two hippocampal fields, CA1 and Dentate gyrus. Control sections with no cholesterol efflux promotion had cell bodies stained with filipin. This staining was also present at 20 min efflux with cyclodextrine, but disappeared after 6 h of cholesterol efflux. The most illustrative were sections of slices subjected to 6 h incubation with 5 mM cyclodextrine. This condition caused the removal of filipin staining of the hippocampal pyramidal and granule cell bodies yielding their appearance as unstained dark strips. The mild cholesterol efflux preserved cell bodies staining but caused no staining of cholesterol in neural cell processes. High magnification zoomed at stratum radiatum of the CA1 showed dark appearance of bno staining patternQ of cholesterol removal in the neurites.

Second part of this work, published earlier in the FASEB Journal and as letter in Science magazine, included the analysis of electrophysiological properties of slices as presented below [1,2].

Essential role for cholesterol in synaptic plasticity

We recorded extracellular field evoked postsynaptic potentials (abbreviated as a EPSP) in the hippocampal CA1 stratum radiatum. We found that slices with increased cholesterol dynamics due to cyclodextrine or HDL3 incubation are impaired in input-output (I/O) relation, the chart of EPSP size versus stimulus intensity, and a parameter of basic synaptic function.

Experimental slices were also impaired in long-term potentiation (LTP) a long-lasting synaptic enhancement that serve a leading experimental system for the synaptic plasticity that underlie learning and memory.

Cholesterol efflux also increased the magnitude of the paired pulse facilitation (abbreviated as PPF), an efficient test to detect changes within presynaptic terminals, indicating cholesterol-mediated break of the dynamic properties of synaptic transmission and short-term plasticity. These results suggest an essential role for cholesterol in basic synaptic physiology, neurotransmission and in both postsynaptic and presynaptic plasticity mechanisms.

Cholesterol disbalance causes hippocampal neural degeneration

We further tested whether impaired hippocampal cholesterol dynamics causes the disruption of normal neuronal cytoskeleton composed of longitudinally arranged neurofilaments and microtubules. We found that cholesterol depletion causes neurodegenerative fragmentation and teardrop varicose widenings of neurites in all hippocampal subfields and the development of paired helical filaments (PHF) of microtubule-associated protein tau in neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) in the terminal sector of the hippocampal mossy fibers.

Specifically, acute experimental cholesterol dynamics break caused tau immunostaining of pyramidal and granule cells of the CA1 and the Dentate Gyrus. We also observed the removal of tau-1 staining. Tau-1 is a monoclonal antibody to all electrophoretic forms of non-phosphorylated rat tau, so, no staining with tau-1 indicated phosphorylation of tau-1 epitopes. This was confirmed by immunostaining of experimental slices with AT8 monoclonal antibodies that recognize PHF-tau phosphatase-sensitive epitope (containing phosphorylated Ser-202 residue) and do not recognize normal tau [1,2]. Cholesterol-dependent PHF-like tau phosphorylation in neuronal cell cultures was shown before [3].

Paired helical filaments, PHF, are abnormal filaments. A decade ago they were proposed by Professor George Perry et al. to substitute normal neurofilaments in the process of neurodegeneration [4]. To study whether tau phosphorylation is accompanied by a neurofilament change in our experimental system, we performed staining of slices with anti-neurofilament antibody. We found that cholesterol removal with cyclodextrine caused neurodegenerative break of the neurofilament integrity, expressing typical for neurodegeneration neurofilament antibody-positive fragmentations and tea-drop varicose widenings of neural processes in all subfields of the hippocampus.

Cholesterol, other lipids, synaptic plasticity, AB and Alzheimer's disease

Cholesterol imperfection and amyloid beta protein

We also performed immunostaining of slices with 4G8 monoclonal antibodies that specifically stain amyloid beta (Ah) protein, the most blamed molecule in Alzheimer's disease research. Under the condition of acute cholesterol modulation with cyclodextrine or HDL3 we did not observe the change in the pattern of Ah immunostaining. The change of Ah chemistry was observed, however, under the condition of chronic cholesterol modulation in vivo. This was shown in rabbits by Sparks [5], in transgenic mice by Refolo et al. [6], and by us in laboratory rats fed a 2% cholesterol diet for a prolonged period of time, 4 months or longer [7,8].

Chronic modulation of cholesterol causes neurodegeneration features

Cholesterol-fed and control rats were subjected to the analysis of lipid synthesis, study of the synaptic plasticity (LTP), and the histochemical analysis of hamyloid. We also studied the behavior of these animals. We reported cholesterol diet-born changes of rat behavior elsewhere [9]. Lipid synthesis was studied by incorporation of radioactive [C 14 ]-acetate (a precursor label to trace lipid synthesis) into the newly synthesized lipids. Radioactive cholesterol and phospholipids were further separated by the thin-layer chromatography (TLC), and counted for radioactivity. We found that rats fed a 2% cholesterol diet have increased synthesis of cholesterol and all tested phospholipids (phosphatidylcholine, PC; phosphatidylethanolamine, PE; phosphatidylserine, PS; phosphatidylinositol, PI) in the hippocampus and cortex.

Electrophysiological analysis of the synaptic plasticity revealed an impairment of the LTP in the cholesterol-fed animals. LTP break could be reversed by the reversal of the diet to the regular one for a prolonged period of time. Most significant, we found a spectrum of amyloid deposits in cholesterol-fed animals. We observed typical Alzheimer's like plaque amyloid, non-mature plaque missing the dense central core, and vascular amyloid deposits. It is important to note that acute modulation of cholesterol (see above) did not affect Ah but featured synaptic plasticity impairment. This is the reason we believe that the change of Ah neurobiochemistry in AD is a secondary compensatory event, not the disease cause.

LTP and Ab increase hippocampal lipid synthesis, Ab mediates increase of the cholesterol uptake by the hippocampus

In a separate experimental series we set to test and confirmed that LTP requires neuronal lipid synthesis [1]. To this end we metabolically labeled slices with radioactive lipid precursor [ 14 C] acetate after the the induction of the LTP with a tetanic stimulus (100 Hz, 1 s). The slices were then washed out of precursor excess, dried on a slide, and incubated with the photographic film to yield radioautograph. Autoradiography revealed the increase in label incorporation into the hippocampal CA1 area after the induction of LTP in stratum radiatum recording pathway as compared with not-tetanized slices subjected to baseline recording only.

This led us to further test lipid synthesis in hippocampal slices after high potassium (K + )-evoked depolarization, and lipid synthesis modulation by the synthetic analog of amyloid h protein, peptide Ah1-40 [1]. Over the prolonged incubation with the label slices remained viable and actively synthesized PC, PE, PS and cholesterol. Ah treatment increased the synthesis of PC, PE and cholesterol on 33%, 67% and 46% above the control values (100%), respectively. Additional experimentation showed that Ah also enhanced the uptake of tritiated [ 3 H] cholesterol by slices, ~32.5% in 6 h above the control value (100%, no Ah). In contrast, K + -evoked depolarization did not significantly change specified lipid syntheses, suggesting that membrane depolarization, basal synaptic activity and neurotransmission do not enhance hippocampal lipid synthesis as it occurs after long-lasting synaptic enhancement (LTP).

Amyloid precursor protein (APP) and Ab protein are integrated sensor-effector system for neural cholesterol and membrane dynamics regulation

Function for Ah in cholesterol and other lipid metabolism and the data on the importance of cholesterol compartmentation for Ah generation indicate feedback functional relation between cholesterol and Ah homeostasis [10,11]. It is supported by a dependency of APP processing by secretases and Ah production on membrane lipid rafts, caveolae, LRP, apoE, cholesterol intracellular storage, sterol regulatory binding protein (SREBP) signaling (particularly on the deficiency in site 2 processing of SREBP and associated inability of cells to upregulate enzymes and proteins involved in cholesterol synthesis and turnover). APP processing and Ah generation also depend on transit of cholesterol via efflux, intracellular trafficking, uptake and its receptor machinery [10,11]. On the other hand, as reported previously, Ah itself affects the key steps of cholesterol homeostasis including cellular uptake, efflux, esterification and synthesis. The latter effect is different in liver, and thus is tissue specific [12,13]. While the above complex relation is of major importance for normal synaptic function, plasticity (activity-dependent, developmental and under recovery from injury), neurodegeneration, and sporadic AD, the functional interaction of APP, Ah and cholesterol also explains genetic predisposition to neurodegeneration in rare familial AD cases having APP or presenilin (PS) mutations, and in Down syndrome, a trisomy 21 (see below). Please note that PS also depends on cholesterol trafficking and itself affects lipid metabolism [14,15].

Cholesterol and other neurodegenerative diseases

Cholesterol and neurodegeneration hallmarks

In fact, significant experimental evidence (that we attempted to integrate in our earlier contribution [7,8]) show that cholesterol may be the primary cause for a number of neurodegeneration features in general, and in AD in particular (Fig. 1). These features include, but are not limited to, the discussed above change in tau biology and other cytoskeleton rearrangements, the change in oxidative stress reactions [16][17][18], and cholinergic dysfunction [7,8].

We believe that in the early phase of AD onset these changes serve important compensatory function. This mean that when due to cholesterol failure synaptic machinery breaks, tau, oxidative reactions and Ah may serve to counterbalance cholesterol homeostasis break, to adapt the brain and help to restore the function. Tau phosphorylation may help re-organize cytoskeleton so, it could appropriately serve neurotransmission. Oxidative reactions could affect membrane lipid peroxidation and modulate synaptic membrane fluidity (critical for receptor function) so the neurotransmission receptor machinery remains functional. Ah may serve to modulate oxidative cascade reactions, because Ah normally serves as antioxidant [16]. We showed that Ah can also modulate lipid synthesis, cholesterol and phospholipids in particular, and thus help to restore neural dynamics of these pivotal lipid membrane components.

Overlap of neurodegeneration hallmarks across the spectrum of neurodegenerative diseases

It is important to realize that different neurodegenerative diseases express significant overlap in major markers. Some Fig. 1. Neurodegeneration hallmarks: brain disease endpoints or reversible compensatory mechanisms designed by nature? The scheme illustrates the genesis of cholesterol-mediated neurodegeneration. Although the scheme was originally developed to represent the cascade of the sporadic forms of Alzheimer's disease (see detailed original legend for the scheme at http://neurobiologyoflipids.org/content/1/6 [7,8]) it is applicable with no modification to other nervous system pathologies described at length of this article as disorders of cholesterol-mediated neurodegeneration (A). The scheme, however, is also applied to other neurodegenerative brain diseases. This is because in response on the central event of any type neurodegeneration, an Impairment of neurotransmission, synaptic function and plasticity (B), CNS launches standard set of physiological compensatory mechanisms that aim to restore impaired synaptic function (C, ticks). Primary cause of a disease (that in case of Parkinson's disease may be the failure of the forebrain dopamine system, for example) defines the specificity of a chemical neurotransmission break, and the fine tuning of compensatory mechanisms and their combination (C), yielding the unique pattern of neurodegenerative markers overlap in different diseases [19,20] and individual patients [30]. Such look on neurodegeneration requires novel focus for drug therapy: a restoration of impaired primary cause that will lead to the reversal of a disease secondary features. The proposed scenario implies that battling secondary degenerative features sadly has no ability to cure any type neurodegeneration. This figure is adapted and used by permission [7].

of these features are also present normally during specific period of ontogenesis, further implying that what we call bpathogenesis markersQ are in fact tested by nature developmental or compensatory mechanisms. This means that fighting the conventional disease features, Ah and tau for example, will not benefit patients as underlying primary cause will not be cured. But what is a primary neurodegeneration cause?

What is a primary cause for neurodegeneration?

Is there a relevance of cholesterol mediated neurodegeneration to different neurodegenerative diseases? If so is there neurodegeneration specificity? We do think so. We believe that cholesterol dynamics failure may be a primary pathogenic cause in a number of diseases, such as AD, Down syndrome, neuromuscular disorders, and of course Niemann-Pick's type C disease. On the other hand other diseases may have another primary pathological break (e.g. the break of the forebrain dopamine system in Parkinson's disease). Even in this case the brain may operate its standard set of compensatory mechanisms, causing the overlap of morphologic changes, and explaining the unity of markers across the spectrum of neurodegenerative disorders (Fig. 1) [19][20][21][22].

Cholesterol and Down syndrome

Down syndrome patients are characterized by reduced cholesterol esterification in plasma [23]. They also have specific pattern of the liver sterol regulatory element binding protein (SREBP) activation, and sterol-independent maturation of SREBP. Down syndrome is also characterized by high circulating and tissue cholesterol levels in utero [24].

Neuromuscular disease, Ab/APP metabolism and cholesterol

Further investigation is warranted to elucidate the normal role for Ah at synapse and neuro-muscular junctions (NMJ). In a study published a decade ago [25], it was first demonstrated that APP and Ah concentrate postsynaptically at human NMJs, leading authors to conclude that bAPP may have a role in normal junction biology and possibly in some diseases affecting NMJsQ. Another study later showed that APP homolog in Drosophila (APPL) promotes synapse differentiation at the neuromuscular junction [26], leading the authors to propose a model bby which APPL, in conjunction with activity-dependent mechanisms, regulates synaptic structure and numberQ. Few years later this pivotal knowledge, changing the neuroscience research community view on Ah as solely neurotoxic, was extended with data obtained for the CNS synapses. The latter study showed activity dependent secretion of Ah and proposed roles for Ah in synaptic transmission [27,28].

Ab, cholesterol and synaptic plasticity: a functional triangle

In our own recent study peptide Ah1-40 rescued synaptic plasticity, while cholesterol synthesis inhibition with mevinolin (a member of a group of drugs inhibiting cholesterol biosynthesis, HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors, also called statins) abolished the restorative action of the Ah peptide. This observation confirms that Ah protein is a functional player in synaptic structure-functional plasticity on one hand, and in cholesterol neurochemical pathways on the other [11].

The change of Ah biology and PHF tau phosphorylation are characteristic features of inclusion-body myositis (IBM) [29]. Furthermore, Ah accumulation in cerebral vessels and plaques may be much more general neural degeneration phenomenon then previously thought, as it occurs frequently not only in AD, but also in Parkinson's disease (PD), diffuse Lewy body disease (DLBD), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) but not multiple systems atrophy (MSA) or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) [30]. This study, however, reports an unusual ALS case marked by extensive cerebral Ah deposition in small and medium-size vessels, capillaries, and perivascular plaques in the cerebral cortex, and in most leptomeningeal vessels, but lacking cognitive impairment. The authors' conclusion is: bthe lack of cognitive impairment in the case presented argues against the idea that extensive amyloid h deposition in the brain causes dementiaQ [30].

Finally, most recent study showed an abnormal accumulation of lipoprotein receptors (including LDL-R receptor, VLDL-R receptor, and lipoprotein related protein, LRP) and cholesterol in vacuolated muscle fibers in IBM [29]. In ball myopathies, a subset of regenerating and necrotizing muscle fibers had prominent diffuse accumulation of both LDL-R and cholesterolQ [29]. Lipoprotein receptors govern cellular uptake of cholesterol in its receptor-mediated transport [31]. What is their role in neurodegenerative diseases and how this is related to cholesterol and synapse normal dynamics and pathological failure remains to be investigated. The detection of lipoprotein receptors at normal NMJ postsynaptically [29] and their abundance in the hippocampus [1] suggests their physiological role for neurotransmission in both peripheral and central nervous system. Explaining our own data (see section bEssential role for cholesterol in synaptic plasticityQ above) and integrating them with important studies by others [32,33] we proposed in 2001 that lipoprotein receptormediated cholesterol redistribution and synthesis could be adaptive complementary processes important at early and late stages of the activity-dependent synaptic structurefunction plasticity that underlie learning and memory [1,34].

Apolipoprotein E, cholesterol and neuromuscular diseases

Apolipoprotein (apo) E is known as a major genetic AD risk factor [35]. Less appreciated in neurology is the central role for apoE in cholesterol metabolism, as it serves as a major cholesterol transport apolipoprotein. ApoE involvement in AD may be mediated through cholesterol dynamics [35]. Recent review on the subject summarized that apoE may be important in neuromuscular disease in the same way as in Alzheimer's, q4 allele serving a bad allele, and q2 being a protective one bagainst developing certain neuromuscular diseases, including the ALS/Parkinsonism/dementia complex of Guam. This allele is also associated with a better prognosis in neuromuscular diseases such as motor neuron disease. The effect of various APOE alleles on neuromuscular diseases therefore parallels their influence on CNS diseasesQ, the authors conclude [36]. ApoE q4 homozygosity may also accelerate tau phosphorylation and NFT formation and Ah deposition in Niemann-Pick type C disease [37].

Niemann-Pick type C disease, cholesterol and neurodegeneration

Niemann-Pick disease type C (NPC) bis an inherited neurodegenerative disorder associated with intracellular cholesterol and glycolipid trafficking defects. Two separate genes, NPC1 and NPC2, have been linked to NP-C. NPC1 encodes a polytopic membrane-bound protein with a putative sterol-sensing domain. NPC2 has been recently identified as epididymal secretory glycoprotein 1. The NPC1 protein functions in the vesicular redistribution of endocytosed lysosomal cargoQ [38], and is a key component in the intracellular distribution of cholesterol obtained from lipoproteins by the endocytic pathway. A mouse model of Niemann-Pick type C disease bexhibits neuropathology similar to the human condition. There is an age-related neurodegeneration in several brain regions and a lack of myelin in the corpus callosumQ [39].

One of the explanations bsuggest that a functional disturbance in NPC1 could disrupt vesicular transport of cholesterol, glycolipids and possibly other endocytic cargo in glia, which is critical for maintaining the integrity of neurons [38,39]. The view of NPC neurodegeneration as a pathology of neuronal cholesterol proper was also suggested [40]. bUsing filipin fluorometry of neuronal cells in tissue slices, [authors] found massive accumulation of cholesterol in neurons in four out of five human NPC cases. Neurofibrillary tangles composed of aggregates of the otherwise highly soluble protein tau were present in three Niemann-Pick type C cases and were also immunologically identical to those associated with ADQ [40].

Specificity of cholesterol-mediated neurodegeneration

Cholesterol, neurodegeneration and neurotransmission chemical specifity

Another important question is: what is the specific mechanism of cholesterol-mediated synaptic function break? Recent and emerging evidence shows that cholestrol affects the pharmacology of the several chemical neurotransmitters, receptor and transporter systems, including cholinergic [41][42][43], GABAergic [44][45][46], 5-HT1A/serotonin [47,48], inhibitory glycine [49] and excitatory amino acid systems [50].

Cholesterol and the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChR)

Perhaps, the most advanced data are available for the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChR). The isolated nAChRs express high affinity for cholesterol. Cholesterol is also required for functional insertion of nAChRs into artificial membranes: bonly after nAChRs are inserted into the postsynaptic membrane and charged with cholesterol do they become fully activeQ [41][42][43]. There are several proposed mechanisms [41], but the details remain to be investigated. 

Conclusions

Acknowledgments

This article serves to commemorate the 40th anniversary of the BioMedical Faculty of the Russian State Medical University (November 2003), the authors' alma mater. Our research is dedicated to our parents and our kids.

1 .1Cholesterol itself plays an essential role in synaptic function, plasticity and neurodegeneration. 2. The failure of fine tuning of brain cholesterol homeostasis causes the change of cholinergic function, ionotropic and metabotropic receptor machinery, excessive tau phosphorylation, modulates Ah biochemistry, neural oxidative stress reactions, and other features of neurodegeneration. The above changes are secondary features representing functional compensation for neural cholesterol biological misregulation. 3. The above explains the overlap of neurodegenerative hallmarks across the spectrum of neurodegenerative diseases. 4. Cholesterol homeostasis break is the unifying primary cause and the major target for therapy of sporadic and familial AD, neuromuscular diseases, Niemann-Pick's type C disease and Down syndrome.

