Preservation of in vitro muscle fiber function in dermatomyositis and inclusion body myositis: a single fiber study

Five patients with untreated dermatomyositis, five with inclusion body myositis, and 16 healthy elderly volunteer subjects (controls) underwent open (dermatomyositis and inclusion body myositis) or percutaneous (controls) muscle biopsy. Biopsied muscles included deltoid, biceps and vastus lateralis. Chemically skinned single muscle fibers were activated with Ca C2 ; the slack test was performed to determine maximal unloaded shortening velocity (V o ). Parameters measured include single fiber cross sectional area, maximal force, specific force and V o . 429 Type I and 94 Type IIA fibers were studied. Cross sectional area and maximal force were greater in inclusion body myositis than dermatomyositis or control for Type I and IIA fibers. Specific force of Type I fibers was similar in inclusion body myositis and dermatomyositis but greater than in controls. V o was greater in Type I, but not IIA, fibers in dermatomyositis compared with inclusion body myositis and controls. The force and velocity generating capacity of single muscle fibers is preserved in patients with dermatomyositis and inclusion body myositis suggesting that dysfunction of the contractile proteins does not contribute to clinical muscle weakness.

Introduction

The inflammatory myopathies are acquired muscle disorders with an incidence of one in 100,000. There are three main forms of disease based on clinical and immunohistochemical characteristics: polymyositis (PM), dermatomyositis (DM) and inclusion body myositis (IBM). Endomysial inflammation with invasion of non-necrotic muscle fibers is required for diagnosis of PM [1,2]. The characteristic histologic findings of DM are perifascicular atrophy and perivascular and perimysial inflammation. IBM, the most common inflammatory myopathy in those over age 50, is characterized by endomysial inflammation with invasion of non-necrotic muscle fibers, the presence of rimmed vacuoles, cytoplasmic and intranuclear tubulofilamentous inclusions, and amyloid deposition. The clinical presentation and courses of these inflammatory myopathies are disparate, and their etiologies are not fully elucidated. DM is felt to be a humorally-mediated microangiopathy, while PM appears to be caused by a cell-mediated autoimmune attack directed against the muscle fibers. Some also consider IBM to be an autoimmune disorder, but others believe it is primarily a degenerative disorder of muscle.

It is important to understand how the disease process affects muscle quality and function because muscle weakness is a major symptom of all inflammatory myopathies. The measurement of whole muscle strength is complicated by a myriad of factors such as muscle fiber pennation angle, the presence of intramuscular connective tissue, muscle coactivation during strength testing, variation in motor unit recruitment patterns, and differences in mechanical leverage associated with various joint positions. Many of these confounding variables are eliminated by using skinned single muscle fibers to study contractile properties. The skinned fiber preparation allows evaluation of the contribution of individual fiber types to force production, and it allows study of the relationship between myofibrillar protein molecular composition and single muscle cell contractile function. A small number of studies investigating both the contractile properties and the biochemical composition of chemically skinned human single muscle fibers have been published. Most of these studies have focused on young, healthy adults; only a few studies have investigated neuromuscular diseases such as post-polio [3], myotonic dystrophy [4], and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis [5]. To our knowledge, single fiber studies, including assessment of contractile properties and myosin heavy chain (MHC) isoform composition, have not been published with data from any patients with inflammatory myopathy.

The objective of this study is to characterize the contractile properties of single muscle fibers in the DM and IBM and to compare them to those of individuals without a neuromuscular disease. Based on preliminary work by our group, we hypothesize that the force generating capacity of single fibers will be reduced in DM and that maximal unloaded shortening velocity will be increased in both DM and IBM to help maintain muscle power output in the face of an overall loss of force producing capacity in the muscle [6]. This data could lead to a better understanding of the pathophysiology of these disorders and may be useful in assessing response to treatment.

Methods

Subjects

We studied five patients with untreated DM (three women and two men) and five patients with IBM (one woman and four men). Mean subject age was 61 years (range 39-73) for DM and 68 years (range 60-77) for IBM. The study was approved by the human studies committee of Brigham and Women's Hospital. Data from the patients were compared with that obtained from healthy sedentary elderly subjects participating in another study performed in our laboratory (10 women, six men; mean age 72, range 65-84 years).

Muscle biopsies and single fiber preparation

Muscle tissue was obtained from open biopsies performed in the DM and IBM patients for diagnostic purposes. Biopsies were from the biceps (NZ7), vastus lateralis (NZ 2), and deltoid (NZ1). Strength of all biopsied muscles was 4-/5 or better. In the control subjects, percutaneous biopsy specimens were taken from the vastus lateralis muscle 12-15 cm proximal to the superior pole of the patella under local anesthesia using a Bergstrom biopsy needle [7,8].

All biopsy specimens were placed in relaxing solution (see below) at 4 8C. Bundles of w50 fibers were dissected free from the samples and then tied with surgical silk to glass capillary tubes at slightly stretched lengths. The fibers were chemically skinned for 24 h in relaxing solution containing 50% (v/v) glycerol at 4 8C and were then stored at K20 8C [9].

Experimental procedure

On the day of an experiment, fibers were placed for 30 min in relaxing solution containing 0.5% Brij-58 (polyoxyethylene 20 cetyl ether; Sigma Chemical Co., St Louis, MO) prior to mounting in an experimental apparatus, similar to the one described previously [10]. A fiber segment length of approximately 1.5 mm was left exposed to the solution between connectors leading to a force transducer (Model 400A, Aurora Scientific, Ont., Canada) and a DC torque motor (Model 308B, Aurora Scientific). The apparatus was mounted on the stage of an inverted microscope (Olympus IX70, Tokyo, Japan). While the fibers were in relaxing solution, sarcomere length was set to 2.75-2.85 mm by adjusting the overall segment length. The segments were observed through the microscope at a magnification of 320!.

The sarcomere length, the segment width, and the length of segment between the connectors was measured with an image analysis system (Image-Pro Plus, Media Cybernetics, Silver Spring, MD). Fiber depth was measured by recording the vertical displacement of the microscope nosepiece while focusing on the top and bottom surfaces of the fiber. Fiber cross-sectional area (CSA) was calculated from the width and depth, assuming an elliptical circumference, and was corrected for the 20% swelling that is known to occur during skinning [10,11]. Specific force (SF) was calculated as maximum force (P o ) normalized to CSA.

Relaxing and activating solutions contained (nM): four MgATP, one free Mg 2C , 20 imidazole, seven EGTA, 14.5 creatine phosphate and sufficient KCl to adjust the ionic strength to 180 mM. The pH was adjusted to 7.0. The concentration of free Ca 2C was 10 K9 M (relaxing solution) and 10 K4.5 M (maximum activating solution) and was expressed as pCa (Klog[Ca 2C ]). Immediately preceding each activation, the fiber was immersed for 10-20 s in a solution with a reduced Ca 2C -EGTA buffering capacity [12]. This solution is identical to the relaxing solution except that EGTA is reduced to 0.5 mM, which results in a more rapid attainment of steady tension during subsequent activation.

Maximum unloaded shortening velocity (V o ) was measured by the slack test procedure [13,14]. Fibers were activated at pCa 4.5, and once steady tension was reached, various amplitudes of slack were rapidly introduced (within 1-2 ms) at one end of the fiber. The time required to take up the imposed slack was measured from the onset of the length step to the beginning of the tension redevelopment. For each amplitude of slack, the fiber was re-extended while relaxed in order to minimize non-uniformity of sarcomere length.

A straight line was fitted to a plot of slack length versus time, using least-squares regression, and the slope of the line divided by the segment length was recorded as V o for that fiber. P o was calculated as the difference between the total tension in activating solution (pCa 4.5) and the resting tension measured in the same segment while in the relaxing solution. All contractile measurements were carried out at 15 8C.

Myosin heavy chain (MHC) composition

After mechanical measurements, each fiber was placed in sodium dodecyl sulphate sample buffer in a plastic microfuge tube and stored at K20 8C. The MHC composition of single fibers was determined by sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) [15]. The acrylamide concentration was 4% (v/v) in the stacking gel and 6% in the running gel, and the gel matrix includes 30% glycerol. Sample loads were kept small (equivalent to w0.05 mm of fiber segment) to improve the resolution of the MHC bands (types I, IIA, IIX). Gels were silver-stained. Proteins were identified using a combination of purified human myosins from the vastus lateralis muscle (for details and references, see Larsson and Moss [14]).

Statistics

Sigma Stat software was used to generate descriptive statistics. One-way ANOVA was performed to compare single muscle fiber contractile properties for Type I and IIA fibers of patients with DM and IBM and control subjects. When differences were significant, post-hoc analysis was performed via Dunn's method or the Holm-Sidak method.

Results

The subjects and information regarding their biopsies are summarized in Table 1. Overall, 258 single fibers were studied from patients with DM and IBM; this included 155 Type I fibers, 61 Type IIA fibers, two Type IIX, and 40 hybrid fibers. The hybrid fibers express more than one MHC isoform (14 I/IIA, 2 I/IIA/IIX, 24 IIA/IIX). The percentage of hybrid fibers in individual biopsies ranged from 0 to 50%. Overall, 22% of the DM fibers and 9% of the IBM fibers were hybrids. Between 19 and 35 fibers were studied from each biopsy. Data are not analyzed statistically for the Type IIX or hybrid fibers because they are relatively rare. Biopsies from the DM patients were obtained within a month or two of symptom onset. Those from IBM patients were obtained 1-5 years after the onset of muscle weakness.

A total of 274 Type I fibers and 33 Type IIA fibers were studied from the healthy control subjects. The number of Type IIA fibers was limited because they are not very prevalent in the vastus lateralis muscle in this elderly population. In fact, 10 of the 16 subjects had one or no Type IIA fibers. There were six Type I/IIA hybrids among the control group (2% of total fibers studied).

Tables 2 and 3 summarize the contractile properties of Type I and IIA fibers respectively from DM, IBM, and control subjects. *Significant difference between IBM and DM in post-hoc analysis. D-significant difference between control and DM in post-hoc analysis. I-significant difference between control and IBM in post-hoc analysis.

Fiber size

For CSA, significant differences between the three subject groups are present for both fiber types (P!0.001). In post-hoc analysis, both Type I and IIA fibers from IBM patients are larger than those of DM patients or controls (P!0.05). Type I fibers from DM patients are smaller than those of controls (P!0.05), but there is no size difference for Type IIA fibers of DM patients compared to controls. The nine Type I/IIA hybrids in DM patients are smaller than the Type I or IIA fibers (mean CSA 3650 mm 2 ), but the 18 Type IIA/IIX hybrids are similar in size. The five Type I/IIA hybrids from IBM patients are similar in size to the pure fiber types, but the Type IIA/IIX hybrids are smaller (mean CSA 4870 mm 2 ).

P o and specific force

P o from Type I and IIA fibers of patients with IBM is greater than that of patients with DM or control subjects (P!0.05); there is no difference between DM and controls. SF of Type I fibers in patients with IBM and DM is similar and is greater than that of controls. There are no between group differences in SF for Type IIA fibers. The Type I/IIA hybrid fibers from DM patients have lower SF than the other fiber types (mean 11.7 mN/cm 2 ), and SF of the Type IIA/IIX hybrids is similar to that of the IIA fibers. The hybrid fibers from the IBM patients generate similar SF to the pure fiber types.

Maximal unloaded shortening velocity (V o )

Type I fibers of patients with DM have a higher V o than those of IBM or control subjects who do not differ from one another (P!0.05). There are no significant between group differences in V o for Type IIA fibers. Fig. 1 illustrates the V o for the different fiber types in the three subject groups. As expected, the Type I/IIA hybrids have V o intermediate between that of Type I and Type IIA fibers, and the Type IIA/IIX hybrids have a faster V o than the Type IIA fibers.

Discussion

The primary finding of this study is that the force generating capacity and shortening velocity of the remaining single muscle fibers is preserved in patients with DM and IBM suggesting that dysfunction of the contractile elements does not contribute to clinical muscle weakness. Thus, while these two disease processes cause destruction and loss of muscle fibers, the remaining fibers function normally once they are activated. Our data suggests that the problem with muscle force generation lies in the quantity of contractile and regulatory proteins, not their quality; however, other elements of the muscle contraction process may also contribute to impairment of force generation at the whole muscle level. This study does not assess steps involved in muscle contraction that occur prior to fiber activation. Because chemical skinning of the fibers, as used in the current study, disrupts both the sarcolemma and the sarcoplasmic reticulum, the experiments assess only the integrity of the contractile and regulatory proteins.

In our similar studies of patients with ALS and facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSH), we also have documented preservation of contractile properties in the remaining muscle fibers [5,16]. In contrast, we have identified a reduction in specific force and shortening velocity in patients with myotonic dystrophy [4]; the etiology of this change in contractile properties is not understood because it is not known how the DMPK mutation in myotonic dystrophy type 1 affects the muscle cell.

Preservation of force generating capacity in the remaining fibers is consistent with what is known about the disease process in IBM. Normal subsarcolemmal staining for dystrophin and other sarcolemmal proteins in IBM [17] suggests that the muscle fiber cytoskeleton remains intact making it unlikely that the contractile proteins are damaged by the inflammatory process.

DM may cause ischemic damage to muscle fibers, but inflammatory cells do not invade muscle fibers. The fibers we studied from patients with DM are most likely fibers that have not experienced ischemia or undergone necrosis. Thus, these remaining fibers have normal force generating capacity.

The finding that specific force is higher in the Type I fibers of the DM and IBM patients than in the control subjects may be an age related phenomenon; our control group is older than the patient groups. In previous work, we have reported that specific force of Type I fibers decreases with age in men but not women [18]. Alternatively, the increase in specific force may be a compensatory mechanism in the remaining muscle fibers to help maintain whole muscle force output in the presence of loss of many muscle fibers.

Patients with IBM appear to develop compensatory hypertrophy of their remaining muscle fibers which is accompanied by a proportional increase in force generating capacity such that specific force in single muscle fibers is unchanged. This hypertrophy is not seen in patients with DM who actually have atrophic remaining Type I fibers when compared with the control subjects. In IBM, fiber hypertrophy probably reflects the chronicity of the disease process. In acute DM, fiber size variability is slight, but it increases with the chronicity of the disease process [19]. However, patients with DM do not typically develop any hypertrophic fibers; their fiber type variability is due to a combination of atrophic and normal size fibers. Similar muscle fiber hypertrophy has been reported in prior polio [3], those with more slowly progressing cases of ALS [5], and in a patient with FSH [16].

The increased V o in Type I fibers of patients with DM may be a compensatory mechanism to help maintain muscle power output in the face of progressive loss of muscle mass and single fiber atrophy. Muscle power is a product of force and velocity. Thus, single fiber power can be improved by increasing force, V o , or both.

Hybrid fibers are more prevalent in DM and IBM than in control subjects. Others have reported a similar increase in the percentage of hybrid fibers when patients with IBM are compared with age matched control subjects [17]. The hybrid fibers are believed to be regenerating muscle fibers undergoing a transitional process from fast to slow or vice versa. Arnardottir et al.'s finding that many of these hybrid fibers also contained neonatal MHC supports the idea that they are regenerating fibers [17]. Neonatal MHC is not typically found in healthy adult muscle fibers.

One might argue that the difference in prevalence of hybrid fibers is related to the muscle selected for biopsy rather than the disease process. All DM biopsies were from the biceps or deltoid. Control biopsies were from vastus lateralis, and IBM biopsies from a mixture of these muscles. However, there is not a strong body of literature documenting the percentage of hybrid fibers in various muscles. Of note, the three muscles studied all are reported in young adults to have a relatively equal mix of Type I and II fibers [20]. Hybrid fibers are not detected with routine myofibrillar ATPase histochemical staining techniques; they can only be detected by staining biopsy cross sections with monoclonal antibodies for the various MHCs or by performing single fiber analyses such as those we report. Studies of the vastus lateralis in healthy younger subjects have reported 27-41% hybrid fibers [21,22], which is significantly higher than what we found in our older control subjects. Conversely, a study of the deltoid muscle in collegiate athletes reported only 2% hybrid fibers [23]. Data on the percentage of hybrid fibers is not readily available for subjects in the age range of those reported here.

With respect to size, type I fibers from the vastus lateralis have been reported to be approximately 20% larger in diameter than those of the deltoid or biceps in the same study of young adults [24]. This makes the fiber hypertrophy in IBM even more significant since these biopsies contained a mix of fibers from the biceps and vastus lateralis, whereas the control biopsies were all vastus lateralis. This study has several weaknesses. First, not all biopsies were taken from the same muscle. One might question whether the contractile properties of Type I and IIA fibers from different muscles are similar. The work of other investigators suggests that, within a particular individual, the contractile properties of fibers with the same MHC composition are relatively independent of the muscle in which the fibers reside [25].

An additional weakness is that the DM and IBM patients were at different points in their disease process when their biopsies were taken. Despite this, the average strength of the biopsied muscles was quite similar on the five-point Medical Research Council scale. Patients with DM had a median MRC score of 4C (range 4-5), and those with IBM had a median score of 4 (range 4-5).

In conclusion, we have found that the force and velocity generating capacity of the remaining muscle fibers in patients with DM and IBM is well preserved. Thus, dysfunction of the contractile apparatus in intact muscle fibers does not contribute significantly to clinical muscle weakness. Because the contractile properties of the remaining fibers are relatively normal, assessment of the contractile properties of skinned single muscle fibers is not likely to be a useful tool for studying the efficacy of treatments designed to improve muscle strength in patients with DM or IBM unless the therapies produce greater than normal single fiber contractile function as a means of compensating for loss of diseased fibers.

The findings of this study should be confirmed in a prospective study in which subjects and controls are more closely matched by age, and all biopsies are taken from the same muscle. The effect of various pharmacologic treatments for DM and IBM on single muscle fiber contractile properties, whether advantageous or deleterious, also warrants exploration.

Fig. 1 .1Fig. 1. Mean values and standard deviation for maximal unloaded shortening velocity (V o ) in the three subject groups.

Table 1 DM1IBMCONTROLAge61 (39, 59-73)68 (60-77)72 (65-84)Gender3F, 2M1F, 4M10F, 6MMuscle4 bicep, 1 del-3 bicep, 2 VL16 VLtoidFiber number130128313Age is reported as mean (range) in years. DMZdermatomyositis, IBMZinclusion body myositis, FZfemale, MZmale, VLZvastus lateralis.*Significant difference between IBM and DM in post-hoc analysis. I-Significant difference between control and IBM in post-hoc analysis.

