Autoimmune muscular pathologies

The T cell-mediated mechanism responsible for Polymyositis and inclusion Body Myositis and the complement-mediated microangiopathy associated with Dermatomyositis are reviewed. The management of autoimmune myopathies with the presently available immunotherapeutic agents as well as new therapies and ongoing trials are discussed

The autoimmune myopathies include polymyositis (PM), dermatomyositis (DM) and inclusion body myositis (IBM). Other less common entities include fasciitis (eosinophilic or macrophagic) and acute necrotising myopathy. Recent findings have confirmed that PM is an uncommon but frequently misdiagnosed disorder, especially when the diagnosis is based on the old and never validated criteria that characterise PM and IBM. New diagnostic criteria were recently introduced emphasising that the MHC/CD8 complex is a specific immunopathologic marker because it distinguishes the antigen-driven inflammatory cells that characterise PM and IBM from the non-specific, secondary inflammation seen in other disorders, such as dystrophies. The presence of antigen-specific autoinvasive T cells in PM and sIBM has been recently strengthened by proof-of-principle techniques involving CDR3 spectratyping combined with laser microdissected single-cell PCR for amplification of the T-cell receptor genes in autoinvasive cells. The expanded T-cell clones appear to persist for years, even in different muscles in both PM and sIBM. The co-stimulatory molecules ICOS/ICOS-L and PD-L1 are strongly upregulated, indicating an immunological synapse formation between cytotoxic T cells and muscle fibres. In s-IBM, it has become clear that the inflammatory cells invade non-vacuolated fibres while the vacuolated fibres are not invaded by T cells, implying two independent processes: a primary immune process with antigen-driven T cells identical to PM, and a degenerative process in which β-amyloid and related proteins may participate in vacuolar degeneration. A possible interrelationship between inflammation and amyloid, based on recent findings, will be presented. Among the other immune myopathies, DM is easily recognised as a complement-mediated microangiopathy affecting skin and muscle. A histologically distinct myopathy characterised by a T-cell-triggered macrophage

hyperactivation has been also identified among patients with a DM-like disease.

Patients with PM and DM respond to steroids and various immunosuppressant or immunomodulating drugs, such as IVIg, for a period of time. A small number of IBM patients may also respond to IVIg for a short period, but dysphagia appears to be the symptom most consistently responding. New evolving therapies using monoclonal antibodies against B cells or T cells, either alone or in combination with immunosuppressants, appear promising for the treatment of difficult cases and will be discussed.

Suggested readings

Dalakas MC, Hohlfeld R ( 2003 

