Pathogenic accumulation of APP in fast twitch muscle of IBM patients and a transgenic model

Inclusion body myositis (IBM) is the most common age-related degenerative skeletal muscle disorder. The aberrant intracellular accumulation of the ␤-amyloid (A␤) peptide within skeletal muscle is a pathological hallmark of IBM. Skeletal muscle is comprised of both slow and fast twitch fibers, which are present in different proportions in various muscles. It remains unclear if fast and/or slow twitch fibers are differentially involved in IBM pathogenesis. To better understand the molecular pathogenesis of IBM, we analyzed human IBM muscle biopsies and muscle from a transgenic mouse model of IBM (MCK-βAPP). Here we report that the majority of histopathologically-affected fibers in human IBM biopsies were type II fast fibers. Skeletal muscle from MCK-βAPP mice exhibited higher transgene expression and steady-state levels of human ␤APP in fast type IIB fibers compared to slow type I fibers. These findings indicate that fast twitch fibers may selectively accumulate and be more vulnerable to ␤APPand A␤-mediated damage in IBM. These findings also highlight parallels between the MCK-βAPP mice and the human IBM condition.

Introduction

Inclusion body myositis (IBM) is a degenerative skeletal muscle disorder with an average age of onset of approximately 50 years, and a prevalence rate of 4-9 per 1,000,000 individuals [38]. In rare cases, clinical symptoms manifest as early as 30 years of age [18]. Generally, these early onset cases are attributed to hereditary forms of IBM (hIBM). However, the majority of cases are not hereditary, and are referred to as sporadic IBM (sIBM). Affected muscles in both IBM variants share striking pathobiochemical features in common with Alzheimer's disease (AD) brains [4]. However, it is important to emphasize that IBM and AD are two distinct clinical disorders, and thus far there are no reports to suggest any linkage between them beyond their shared histopathological features.

One of the first histopathological parallels between IBM muscle and the AD brain was discovered in 1991, when Mendell et al. observed plaque-like Congo red-positive/green birefringent amyloid deposits in vacuolated sIBM muscle fibers [27]. This observation was later confirmed when Askanas et al. discovered nearly 100% of vacuolated IBM muscle fibers contained amyloid [5]. Intracellular IBM amyloid deposits are histochemically similar to extracellular amyloid in AD brains [4]. In IBM, intracellular amyloid accumulation is, in part, due to an abnormal increase of ␤APP [6,32]. In support of this, Askanas et al. demonstrated that overexpression of βAPP in cultured human muscle cells results in IBM-like histopathological changes, including vacuolization, congophilic amyloid inclusions in a relatively small percentage of fibers, and intracellular 6-10 nm amyloid-like filaments [7]. In addition, in vivo overexpression of ␤APP/A␤ in transgenic mice results in histopathological alterations similar to that observed in human IBM muscle [21,24,37]. Thus, it has been widely accepted that intracellular accumulation of ␤APP, A␤ and other ␤APP proteolytic fragments play an important role in the pathogenesis of IBM [14,30].

To further investigate the pathophysiological role(s) of ␤APP overexpression and mismetabolism in IBM, we derived transgenic mice that selectively overexpress human ␤APP in muscle using the muscle creatine kinase (MCK) promoter. These mice progressively manifest age-related histopathological and clinical features that mimic those in human IBM, including centric nuclei, angular fibers and deficits in motor performance [37]. In addition, as in human IBM, there is intracellular accumulation of transgenederived human ␤APP and its proteolytic fragments, including C99, A␤ 40 and A␤ 42 [37].

sIBM is characterized by proximal and distal limb weakness, with the quadriceps usually more affected than other lower limb muscles [38]. However, in the rare autosomal recessive hIBM cases caused by mutations in the UDP-Nacetylglucosamine-2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase gene, the quadriceps are spared until late in the disease course [15,19,39]. It is unclear why certain muscle groups are pathologically affected, whereas others are spared. To gain insight into this issue, it is important to note that skeletal muscle is comprised of several different fiber types, distinguished by physiological characteristics such as rate of contraction and production and utilization of ATP [29]. Based on these differences, muscles cells are categorized as slow type I or fast type II fibers [33]. In rodents, fast type II fibers are further subdivided into fast IIA, IIX, and IIB subcategories based on lowest to highest ATPase activity, respectively [40].

In the MCK-βAPP mice, it is unclear if one or both fiber type(s) are more pathologically affected. Here, we set out to determine if certain fiber type(s) differentially express or accumulate transgene-derived ␤APP and A␤, and if certain fiber types are pathologically more vulnerable. To accomplish these goals, we evaluated several hindlimb muscle groups and examined both fast and slow fiber type populations. We found the majority of fibers expressing and accumulating human ␤APP, and its derivatives, were fast type IIB fibers. Moreover, it is also unresolved if certain muscle fiber type(s) are pathologically affected in human IBM. There has been recent insight into this issue in a report where Arnardottir et al. evaluated fiber type morphology in sIBM biopsies. They reported differences in fiber size, with type II fibers appearing smaller, whereas type I fibers were larger in sIBM relative to controls [2]. To evaluate if there is selective involvement of a certain fiber type(s) in human IBM, we also histopathologically examined IBM muscle biopsies and found the majority of pathologically-affected fibers, characterized by centric nuclei, infiltration by immune cells and angular atrophic fibers of varying sizes, were fast type II. Taken together, these data strengthen the validity of our model, which may provide more insight into the pathophysiology of IBM.

Materials and methods

Isolation of single muscle fibers

Soleus, plantaris and the white portion of the medial gastrocnemius (WMG) muscles harvested from MCK-βAPP mice were placed in glycerol-relaxing solution (50% glycerol, 2 mM EGTA, 1 mM MgCl 2 , 4 mM ATP, 10 mM imidazole, 100 mM KCl, pH 7.0) and stored overnight at −20 • C. Microdissected single fibers from whole muscle, were transferred to individual tubes containing 30 l of running buffer (62.5 mM Tris, pH 6.8, 1% SDS, 0.01% bromphenol blue, 15% glycerol, and 5% ␤-mercaptoethanol). Fibers were lysed by heating at 70 • C for 2 min and vortexed for 15 s. Approximately 15 l of the protein extract was used to determine myosin heavy chain (MHC) isoforms, thereby revealing the fiber type by PAGE. The remaining extract was used to determine steady-state levels of the transgene protein via immunoblotting. MHC protein isoforms were separated using techniques previously described [11,12]. Approximately 1 g of protein was loaded into the well of 8% Bis-Tris SDS-PAGE gel. An SG-200 vertical slab gel system (CBS Scientific, Del Mar, CA) was used for electrophoresis, and gels were run for 24 h at 270 V to separate fast type IIA, IIX, and IIB and the slow type I MHC isoforms (order of migration from slowest to fastest) [1]. MHC protein isoform bands were visualized using a silver stain kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Richmond, CA). A densitometer (Molecular Dynamics, Sunnyvale, CA) was used to scan and quantify MHC isoform bands.

Analysis of transgenic expression and protein levels

Total RNA was extracted from soleus, plantaris and WMG from 12-month old MCK-βAPP mice using TRI reagent (Molecular Research Center, Cincinnati, OH). Isolated RNA (10 g) was analyzed by Northern blot using 32 P-labeled 0.24-kb simian virus 40 poly(A) DNA fragment as previously described [37]. Equal RNA loading was confirmed by 18S and 28S bands.

Half of the protein extract from single fibers (approximately 15 l) were loaded onto 7% Tris-Acetate mini gels (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), electrophoresed at 150 V for 2 h under reducing conditions and transferred for 1.5 h at 30 V onto nitrocellulose. Membranes were immunoprobed with 6E10 antibody (Signet, Dedham, MA) or antipresenilin-1 antibody (Cell Signaling Technology, Beverly, MA) overnight at 4 • C with agitation as previously reported [37]. The bottom-half of the membrane was immunoprobed for ␤-actin (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) or GAPDH (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) to normalize protein levels between fibers.

IBM patients

The average age of patients (n = 4) analyzed was 72 years of age, although this does not represent the age of onset. As a control human tissue, we analyzed age-matched polymyositis (PM) cases (n = 4), ranging from 66 to 82 years old. Similar levels of fibrillations and elevated creatine kinase were observed in these patients. Not all data were available on these IBM and PM patients (shown as N/A in Table 1).

SELDI ProteinChip measurement of Aβ

Soleus, plantaris and WMG muscles from MCK-βAPP mice and nontransgenic littermate controls (NonTg) were homogenized in T-PER (Pierce, Rockford, IL) and centrifuged at 100,000 × g for 1 h at 4 • C. A␤ 40 and A␤ 42 levels were determined by surface-enhanced laser desorption and ionization (SELDI) ProteinChip (Ciphergen Biosystems, Fremont, CA) as previously described [28,34]. SELDI chips were coated with human-specific 6E10 antibody and incubated overnight at 4 • C with gentle agitation. A solution of 20% saturated ␣-cyano-4-hydroxy cinnamic acid (CHCA) was added, and the chips were analyzed using the SELDI Pro-teinChip reader (Model PBSII; Ciphergen Biosystems) and Ciphergen's protein chip software version 3.1. After areas of A␤ 40 and A␤ 42 were determined by SELDI, levels of A␤ were normalized with protein concentrations in each sample.

Histological analyses of muscle from transgenic mice and human biopsies

Skeletal muscle tissue was snap frozen in liquid nitrogencooled isopentane and stored at −80 • C. Cryosections were cut at 10 m and placed onto silane-coated slides. Cryosections were immunostained for ␤APP with P2-1 monoclonal antibody at 1:250 dilution (gift from Dr. William Van Nostrand) and counterstained with hematoxylin. P2-1 recognizes an epitope at the N-terminus of human ␤APP, thereby revealing only full-length human ␤APP. It does not cross-react with full-length mouse ␤APP or any of its proteolytic fragments, endogenous or human [31]. Immunostained sections were developed with diaminobenzidine substrate using the avidinbiotin horseradish peroxidase system (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) and counterstained with hematoxylin.

Skeletal muscle biopsies were collected from the quadriceps of four IBM patients, frozen and stored at −80 • C. To evaluate overall morphology and pathology, cryosections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE) and Gomori's one-step Trichrome stain (GMT) [23]. To compare pathology to fiber type distribution, serial sections were stained for ATPase activity at pH 4.6 [9,20]. Sections were placed in incubation buffer (0.1 M sodium acetate, 10 mM EDTA, pH 4.6) for 10 min at 4 • C and then treated with 2% cobalt chloride and ammonium sulfate solution, revealing dark stained fibers as slow twitch [25].

Statistical analysis

χ 2 -Test and t-test were performed to analyze a significance of inclusion frequency between type I and type II myofibers. One-way ANOVA test was used for the rest of statistical analyses.

Results

βAPP steady-state levels are higher in fast twitch fibers

We quantified transgene mRNA and protein levels in whole muscles, soleus, plantaris and WMG and compared these data to fiber-type proportions in these muscles (Fig. 1). Semi-quantitative densitometric analyses of MHC isoform bands indicated half the isoforms in soleus were type IIA, with the remaining equally distributed between types I, IIX and IIB. In plantaris, half the MHC isoforms were type IIB, whereas the remaining isoforms were equally distributed between type IIA and IIX; slow type I MHC isoforms were barely detected. WMG, as expected, was comprised almost exclusively of type IIB, with scant evidence of other isoforms (Fig. 2A). It is important to note that the proportion of MHC isoforms within soleus, plantaris and WMG were identical between transgenic mice and age-and gender-matched Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of isolation protocol for analyzing protein levels in individual myofibers. Soleus, plantaris and the WMG (S, P, and W, respectively) were dissected from the hind limbs of MCK-βAPP transgenic mice. Individual myofibers were isolated by microdissection. Half of the total protein from each fiber was used to determine steady-state levels of transgene protein by immunoblotting with a human ␤APP specific antibody. These blots were then probed for ␤-actin, which was used to confirm successful isolation of a single fiber and to normalize transgene protein levels. The remaining half of the protein extract was used to determine the MHC isoform composition, thereby identifying the fiber type (i.e., type I or IIB).

NonTg controls (data not shown). These data indicate expression and accumulation of the human ␤APP transgene product did not disrupt relative MHC isoform levels within these muscles.

Our analysis showed that low levels of transgene mRNA were present in soleus, with higher levels occurring in plantaris and WMG. To determine whether human ␤APP levels varied between fast and slow muscles, we quantified steady-Fig. 2. Relative levels of transgene mRNA and protein in slow vs. fast muscles. Protein extracts from soleus, plantaris and WMG (S, P, and W, respectively) muscles of MCK-βAPP transgenic mice were electrophoresed to determine relative proportions of MHC isoforms (A). Note the heterogeneity within the soleus, whereas plantaris and WMG have a much higher percentage of fast type II isoforms compared to slow type I. Northern blotting for transgene mRNA revealed low levels in the soleus with relatively higher levels in plantaris and WMG (B). The ethidium bromide reveals equivalent mRNA loading. Immunoblotting for human ␤APP in soleus, plantaris, and WMG in MCK-βAPP mice revealed higher levels of ␤APP in the plantaris and WMG compared to the soleus (C). Densitometric analysis of band intensities after normalizing to ␤-actin, revealed approximately eight times the level of transgene protein in the predominantly fast muscles plantaris and WMG compared to soleus (C). In panels A and C, each bar represents an n = 5 (five different mice), and error bars represent standard error of the mean between five transgenic mice; NonTg: nontransgenic age-and gender-matched littermate control muscle. state ␤APP levels and found higher levels (seven-to eightfold) in plantaris and WMG compared to soleus (Fig. 2C). Taken together, our study reveals that both expression and steady-state levels of transgene-derived ␤APP are highest in muscles with high proportions of fast twitch compared to slow twitch fibers.

SELDI analysis of Aβ 40 and Aβ 42 in muscle

Aberrant proteolytic processing of ␤APP to yield derivatives, such as A␤ in muscle fibers may play a crucial role in IBM-related muscle degeneration [6,30,37]. We previously quantified A␤ 40 and A␤ 42 levels in skeletal muscles from the MCK-βAPP mice by ELISA, albeit without regard to specific levels in fast versus slow muscles [37]. Here we utilized SELDI to compare transgene-derived A␤ 40 and A␤ 42 levels between muscles with different proportions of fast and slow fiber types. SELDI ProteinChip arrays revealed an increase of A␤ 40 and A␤ 42 in muscles from MCK-βAPP mice, whereas none was detected in muscle from age-matched NonTg controls (Fig. 3A, C, E). In the MCK-βAPP mice, little A␤ peptides were found in soleus (Fig. 3B), whereas relatively high levels of both A␤ 40 and A␤ 42 were observed in plantaris and WMG (Fig. 3D, F). These results agree with our previous findings that expression and steady-state levels of human ␤APP are high in these muscles, which contain a greater proportion of fast fibers. Quantification of A␤ in soleus, plantaris and WMG based on protein concentrations further revealed that fast twitch fiber-containing muscles produced significantly higher levels of A␤ peptides than NonTg mice (p < 0.05; Fig. 3G). Levels of A␤ 40 and A␤ 42 in WMG were lower than those in plantaris. This differential level of A␤ production may be partially explained by the activity of APP processing enzymes in these muscles. A␤ peptides are produced by the activity of ␥-secretase, and presenilin-1 (PS1) plays an important role in this enzymatic activity. We have   and C) The ratio of human ␤APP to ␤-actin was analyzed as a function of fiber type. As shown in panel B, type I fibers contained either low levels human ␤APP or none at all (␤APP:␤-actin ratio of 1 or less). In contrast, relatively higher levels of ␤APP were found in type IIB fibers, where a large proportion of individual myofibers had a ␤APP:␤-actin ratio greater than 2 (panel C).

analyzed the steady-state levels of endogenous PS1 in soleus, plantaris and WMG in the MCK-βAPP mice, and we found that the PS1 levels were significantly less in WMG (Fig. 3H), providing the evidence that the production of A␤ peptides in WMG might be limited than that in plantaris.

Single fiber analysis of APP transgene levels in skeletal muscle

To determine in which fiber type(s) transgene ␤APP accumulated, more than 100 single fibers in total were dissected from plantaris, soleus and WMG of the MCK-βAPP mice. One half of the protein extract derived from these fibers was used to quantify human ␤APP levels, whereas the other half was used to determine MHCs levels thereby allowing us to determine the fiber type (Fig. 1). In each case, the ratio of ␤APP to ␤-actin was compared to determine relative amount of transgene protein. Fig. 4 shows a representative immunoblot of protein extracted from single plantaris fibers and assayed for transgene-derived ␤APP. In this particular case, four out of the five plantaris fibers (P1, P2, P4, and P5) contain high ␤APP levels (Fig. 4A). The corresponding MHC analysis revealed that all of these single fibers were fast type IIB (Fig. 4A). In contrast, we found that nearly 80% of the total of type I fibers possessed either barely detectable levels of transgene protein or none at all (Fig. 4B). Overall, many type IIB fibers had a much higher ␤APP to ␤-actin ratio compared to the type I fibers (Fig. 4C). These data agree with previous studies that used the same MCK promoter sequence in which they found high levels of transgene product in muscles with high proportions of type II fast compared to type I slow fibers [16,35].

Immunohistochemical detection of human βAPP in MCK-βAPP muscle

To histologically localize human ␤APP, cryosections from soleus and plantaris from 9-month old MCK-βAPP transgenic and NonTg mice were immunostained with a human-specific ␤APP monoclonal antibody (P2-1). We detected prominent intracellular ␤APP immunostaining in plantaris muscle from the transgenic mice, whereas the soleus tissue was largely devoid of staining (Fig. 5). Although the soleus harbors low levels of human ␤APP by western blotting, it is most likely below the limit of detection by immunohistochemistry with antibody P2-1. Likewise, no immunostaining was detected in either muscle from NonTg control mice.

Pathological changes are primarily associated with fast twitch type IIB muscle fibers in human IBM

Quadriceps muscle biopsy sections from four IBM and PM patients were analyzed to correlate muscle fiber type with pathology (Table 1). Quadriceps muscles from PM patients do not develop any A␤ inclusions or vacuoles as detected by Gomori's one-step trichrome staining (GMT) (data not shown). In contrast, specimens derived from the human IBM cases clearly showed evidence of inflammation, centric nuclei, and small/angular myofibers in distinct focal areas following hematoxylin and eosin staining (Fig. 6A  and C). Muscle biopsy samples from three out of four IBM patients were further assessed to determine if inclusions predominantly occurred in one fiber type. We conducted an enzyme histochemical analysis of ATPase activity at pH 4.6 to distinguish fast and slow twitch fibers (Fig. 6B and D). By comparing serial sections stained with GMT and ATPase stain at pH 4.3, we observed that pathologically affected IBM fibers were predominantly fast twitch (Table 2 and Fig. 6E  and F). Due to the rarity of IBM, only a small number of cases was analyzed, and the necessary precautions of overinterpretating these data are warranted.

For every fascicle that harbored an inclusion-bearing myofiber, we counted the number of type I and II myofibers contained within it. GMT inclusion frequency was calculated from the number of inclusion-bearing myofibers and proportion of fiber type. Our analysis revealed a two-to three-fold higher frequency in type II fibers versus type I fibers in three patients. Statistical analysis revealed a significant association Fig. 5. Human ␤APP localizes predominantly to fast twitch myofibers in an IBM transgenic mouse model. Cryosections from a 9-month old MCK-βAPP mouse were immunostained with the human specific ␤APP antibody, P2-1. The transgenic plantaris muscle demonstrates strong immunoreactivity with numerous fibers staining with varying degrees of intensity (D). No P2-1 immunoreactivity was apparent in the soleus muscle from the MCK-βAPP transgenic mice, even though low levels of human ␤APP were detected by western blotting (B). No immunoreactivity is apparent in the soleus and plantaris muscles of age-matched NonTg control mice (A and C). Fresh frozen quadriceps muscle biopsy sections from three IBM patients were stained with Gomori's one-step Trichrome stain (GMT). Serial cryosections were stained for ATPase at pH 4.3 to histologically distinguish fast type II fibers from slow type I. The number of inclusion-bearing myofibers, fibertype proportion and inclusion frequency were examined (n = 480 patient 1, n = 182 patient 2, n = 657 patient 3).

of GMT-positive inclusions with type II fibers (χ 2 calc = 4.16, χ 2  1,0.05 = 3.84, P < 0.0375). Based on our results from this small sample of IBM patients, it suggests that the pathologically affected muscle fibers are predominantly fast twitch type II fibers. These data, taken together with the biochemical and immunohistochemical evidence from our transgenic model, suggest that fast twitch fibers and muscles with a high proportion of fast fibers are selectively involved in IBM pathogenesis compared to slow muscles and fibers.

Discussion

Analysis of the MCK-βAPP transgenic model indicated that highest transgene expression and steady-state levels of human ␤APP occurred in fast twitch muscle groups, and specifically within individual fast muscle fibers. Likewise, we detected none to low levels of transgene expression and protein in muscles that have a high proportion of slow type I fibers, and found little to none transgene protein in slow fibers. In affected sIBM muscle tissue, we observed that a large proportion of fast type II fibers appeared to be pathologically affected, including being surrounded and invaded by inflammatory cells.

The relationship(s) between IBM pathological alterations and muscle fiber type had not been extensively addressed previously. Moreover, this issue is difficult to address in patients where the disease is likely to be more advanced at the time of tissue biopsy, therefore rendering it difficult to study the early stages of pathogenesis. This is certainly one of the advantages of studying a transgenic model of the disease. To address this issue in our IBM transgenic mice, we examined three hind limb muscles: soleus, plantaris and WMG. These muscles were chosen due to the heterogeneity of fiber types within them.

Steady-state levels of human of ␤APP were higher in the fast twitch muscles plantaris and WMG, compared to the soleus. By analyzing single fibers isolated from soleus, plantaris and WMG, we discovered that the fibers that had high levels of human ␤APP were predominantly fast type IIB (regardless of which whole muscle they were dissected from) compared to none or small levels in type I slow twitch fibers. In support of these findings, other groups using the Fig. 6. IBM pathology is located predominantly within and surrounding fast twitch compared to slow twitch muscle fibers. Cryosections of quadriceps muscle biopsies from human IBM patients were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (A and C). Serial sections were stained for myosin-ATPase activity at pH 4.6 (B and D). Arrows point to muscle fibers with IBM histopathological characteristics, including inflammation, centric nuclei and/or small/angular myofibers (A and C). In serial cryosections, the overwhelming majority of these pathologically affected fibers are lightly stained with ATPase, pH 4.6 and are thus fast type II fibers (B). However, nearly all of the slow muscle fibers (dark stained) appear healthy, round and have large cytosolic volumes (B and D). The higher magnified serial cryosections also show obvious pathological hallmarks in fast type II muscle fibers (arrows in C and D). Serial cryosections were stained with Gomori's one-step trichrome (E) and myosin-ATPase activity at pH 4.3 (F). Note that an inclusion is found in one myofiber (indicated by arrow), and the inclusion-bearing myofiber and surrounding myofibers are degenerated. These affected myofibers are type II fast twitch fibers as indicated by ATPase enzyme staining (F).

same MCK promoter region in transgenic mice, discovered higher expression levels primarily in fast twitch type II fibers compared to slow twitch muscle fibers [16,17].

In addition to ␤APP distribution in the fast versus slow fibers, we also compared the distribution of the two major A␤ isoforms. We first showed that both A␤ 40 and A␤ 42 were elevated in the MCK-βAPP mice compared to agematched NonTg mice. We previously determined that A␤ levels increased dose-dependently in the MCK-βAPP mice [37], and in this study, we further revealed that higher levels of A␤ occurred in fast twitch muscles. Because the MCK-βAPP mice harbor the Swedish mutation in ␤APP, it is not surprising that more A␤ 40 was produced in all three muscles that we measured. Quantitative analyses revealed that both A␤ 40 and A␤ 42 levels in plantaris were relatively greater than those in WMG though the steady-state levels of the APPswe transgene were equivalent in these two muscles. Interestingly, the steady-state levels of endogenous PS1 in plantaris was much higher than in WMG as shown in our result. PS1 is required for the ␥-secretase cleavage of ␤APP. The lower levels of PS1 observed in WMG are consistent with the lower levels of A␤ detected in this tissue relative to plantaris, despite the observation that ␤APP levels are equivalent between these two muscles.

In human IBM, selective muscle fiber type degeneration has not been well documented. Recently, type II muscle fibers in sIBM appear to be smaller compared to controls, indicating that selective vulnerability of muscle degeneration in IBM pathology [2]. As pointed out earlier, this may be due to the analysis of patients with well-established disease. In our study, muscle biopsy sections from IBM patients revealed extensive focal pathology, including angulated degenerating atrophic fibers accompanied by an inflammatory response surrounding and infiltrating affected fibers. These histopathological alterations were nearly exclusively associated with fast twitch muscle fibers. Accordingly, in the early stages of sIBM, affected muscles are predominantly made up of fast fiber type II, including, flexor muscles of the wrists and fingers, and quadriceps [3,22,26,38]. Taken together, these results suggest that fast twitch fibers may be involved in IBM pathogenesis, yet the exact mechanism remains unknown.

Our results also indicate that inclusion bodies are found more frequently in fast twitch fibers compared to slow fibers in human IBM patients, suggesting that fast twitch fibers may generate and/or accumulate more A␤ and thereby form more inclusion bodies. Several lines of evidence demonstrate that A␤ peptides aggregate to form fibrils in lower pH and show greater toxicity in in vitro studies [8,10,36]. One of the major differences between fast and slow twitch muscle fibers is energy production. Fast twitch fibers utilize energy mainly from glycolysis, whereas slow twitch fibers generate most energy by oxidative phosphorylation [22]. Under anaerobic glycolysis, the availability of NAD + is required to generate energy, and NAD + is constantly supplied by the conversion of pyruvate to lactic acid. When more lactic acid is produced, cytosolic condition becomes more acidic. This pH change may exacerbate the A␤ pathology in IBM. However, further investigations are required to identify the differential effect that slow and fast muscle fibers exert on the disease process.

Selective susceptibility of different muscle fibers in disease is not a rare phenomenon. For instance, type II specific atrophy is observed in patients with myasthenia gravis, protein malnutrition and/or chronic high-dose corticosteroids use [13]. Also, type I specific atrophy occurs in several childhood neuromuscular diseases, including infantile myotonic dystrophy [13]. Determining whether a particular muscle type is preferentially affected is a key to elucidating the pathogenic mechanisms that underlie the disorder. In addition, identifying a selectively involved muscle type can be useful for targeting of appropriate therapeutics.

Acknowledgement

This work is supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (AG 26175, NS 41373, and AR 46856). We thank Dr. William Van Nostrand for the P2-1 antibody, Janice Mann for histological preparation of muscles from the mouse model, and Daniel Shvetz and Jonathan Safran for histological preparation and analysis of human IBM muscles.

Fig. 3 .3Fig. 3. SELDI mass spectroscopy analyses of A␤ 40 and A␤ 42 in slow vs. fast muscle. SELDI mass spectroscopy analyses were performed to quantify A␤ 40 and A␤ 42 in soleus (A and B), plantaris (C and D) and WMG (E and F) from 19-month old NonTg (A, C, and E) and MCK-βAPP (B, D, and F) mice. A␤ 40 and A␤ 42 are identified at a mass of 4330-4333 and 4511-4520, respectively. Plantaris and WMG from transgenic mice show relatively high A␤ 40 and A␤ 42 peaks, whereas there is scant evidence of A␤ in the soleus. Diagrams are representative of four mice in each group. As expected, there is no A␤ 40 or A␤ 42 present in the age-matched NonTg mice. (G) Quantitative assessment of A␤ 40 and A␤ 42 levels in soleus, plantaris, and WMG of the MCK-βAPP mice based on SELDI shown in panels B, D, and F. (H) Immunoblotting for endogenous PS1 in soleus, plantaris, and WMG in the MCK-βAPP mice revealed highest levels of PS1 in the soleus and plantaris, and much lower in WMG. Reprobing the membrane with GAPDH serves as a loading control.

Fig. 4 .4Fig.4. Single-fiber analysis for human ␤APP. (A) The top panel shows a representative immunoblot in which four out of five single plantaris fibers from a transgenic mouse contains human ␤APP. An immunoblot for ␤-actin levels confirms successful isolation of all five single fibers. ␤-actin immunoblots were also used to normalize protein levels. The bottom panel shows the analyses of MHC isoforms identified each of the individual fibers as fast type IIB fibers. (B and C) The ratio of human ␤APP to ␤-actin was analyzed as a function of fiber type. As shown in panel B, type I fibers contained either low levels human ␤APP or none at all (␤APP:␤-actin ratio of 1 or less). In contrast, relatively higher levels of ␤APP were found in type IIB fibers, where a large proportion of individual myofibers had a ␤APP:␤-actin ratio greater than 2 (panel C).

Table 11Clinical characteristics of individual IBM and PM patients MAP: motor unit action potential (scaled 0-4, where 4 is normal), and creatine kinase levels (normal 25-230 IU/L). N/A, not available (for further clinical and pathological information see Querfurth et al. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 2001).Subtracting the approximate duration of the disease from the age at evaluation yields an average age of onset at age 70 (which represents the mean age when the disease was detected). Fibrillations (i.e. spontaneous action potentials in individual muscle fibers) were present in patients with relatively advanced stages of IBM. Elevated creatine kinase levels, which indicate muscle fiber degeneration, were also observed.AgeSexDisease duration (years-months)Fibrillations (scaled 0-4)MAP amplitude 0-4 (normal)Creatine kinase levelIBM75F2-01-2+3-4848IBM68F1-3N/AN/A700IBM68M2-02-3+3N/AIBM77F0-3Rare3N/APM82F0-61-3+2-3N/APM70F0-2N/AN/A7826PM82F0-31-2+455PM66F0-8N3363Fibrillations (scaled 0-4),

Table 22Inclusion-bearing myofiber frequency in type I vs. type II fibers from IBM patientsIBM patient# of GMT inclusion-bearing myofibersFiber type proportion (fraction) (S.D.)GMT inclusion frequencyType IType IIType IType IIType IType II1280.380.62 (22)5.213.02140.340.66 (10)2.96.03450.680.32 (11)5.915.7

