Myostatin is increased and complexes with amyloid-β within sporadic inclusion-body myositis muscle fibers

Myostatin is a negative regulator of muscle mass and strength. Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM) is the most common degenerative muscle disease of older persons and is characterized by pronounced muscle wasting. s-IBM is of unknown etiology and pathogenesis, and it lacks definitive treatment. We have now demonstrated in samples from 12 s-IBM biopsies that: (1) by light and electron microscopic immunocytochemistry, myostatin/myostatin precursor is accumulated within muscle fibers and co-localized with amyloid-b (Ab); (2) by immunoblots, both myostatin and myostatin precursor are increased; and (3) by immunoprecipitation, myostatin precursor complexes with Ab. Our study suggests that myostatin/myostatin precursor, either alone, or bound to Ab, may play a novel role in the pathogenesis of s-IBM.

Introduction

Myostatin, also called growth and differentiation factor 8 (GDF8), is a member of the transforming growth factor-b (TGF-b) superfamily (reviewed in [4]). Myostatin is a negative regulator of muscle growth during development and of muscle mass in adulthood [4].

Myostatin has sparked recent interest because a child with a homozygous G fi A transition at nucleotide g.IVS1+5 in the myostatin gene has significantly increased muscle-fiber bulk and is unusually strong [16].

His mother, a heterozygous carrier of the same mutation, is a professional athlete, and others in her family are unusually strong [16]. This mutation causes missplicing of myostatin mRNA, resulting in reduced production of myostatin protein [10,16].

Conversely, a few previous studies have shown that muscle wasting in patients with HIV is associated with increased myostatin protein in muscle tissue [5], and myostatin mRNA is increased in disuse muscle wasting in osteoarthritis [13]. In mouse models, knocking out the myostatin gene, overexpressing proteins neutralizing myostatin, or natural mutations of the myostatin gene cause larger muscle mass [4,10]. Naturally occurring myostatin gene mutations cause inactive protein, leading to ''double-muscle'' cattle [11], (reviewed in [4,10]).

Myostatin has not been previously studied in a human myopathy, to our knowledge. Sporadic inclusionbody myositis (s-IBM), the most common myopathy of persons over the age of 50 years, is of unknown etiology and pathogenesis, and lacks definitive treatment [1]. It causes progressively severe muscle weakness, wasting and disability [1]. s-IBM pathology includes: (1) vacuolar degeneration and atrophy of muscle fibers, accompanied by intra-muscle-fiber focal deposits of amyloid-b (Ab), and focal cytoplasmic accumulations of 15-to 21nm-diameter paired-helical filaments (PHFs) containing phosphorylated tau, both accumulations being congophilic; and (2) various degrees of lymphocytic inflammation [1]. Intriguingly, the s-IBM muscle-fiber molecular morphological phenotype is similar to that of Alzheimer's disease brain, including, in addition to the deposits of Ab and PHF tau, accumulations of several other ''Alzheimer-characteristic'' proteins [1].

We have proposed a key role of increased intracellular Ab in the pathogenesis of s-IBM [1], supported by studies showing that experimental overexpression of Ab precursor protein (AbPP) within cultured normal human muscle fibers induced several aspects of the IBM pathological phenotype [2,9]. Still unknown are the actual mechanisms leading to the multifaceted muscle pathology of s-IBM, including pronounced muscle-fiber atrophy.

We now ask whether myostatin might contribute to the pathogenesis of muscle weakness and atrophy in s-IBM.

Material and methods

Light-microscopic immunocytochemistry

Immunocytochemistry was performed on 10-lm transverse sections of fresh-frozen diagnostic muscle biopsy specimens obtained, with informed consent, from 34 patients: s-IBM (12), dermatomyositis (1), polymyositis (2), oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (2), acid maltase deficiency (1), morphologically non-specific myopathy (1), Duchenne muscular dystrophy (3), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (2), peripheral neuropathy (2) and normal muscle (11).

Single and double immunofluorescence was performed as described [3,12,18,19], using a well-characterized anti-myostatin rabbit polyclonal antibody (Chemicon, Temecula, CA), diluted 1:400. This antibody, developed against a myostatin sequence B (NMLYFNGKEQIIYGKI) (Carol Birmingham, Product Manager, Chemicon Laboratories, personal information), recognizes a 28-kDa band of myostatin dimer and 55-kDa band of unprocessed myostatin (myostatin precursor) in human and animal muscle tissue [5,14]. Two other antibodies against myostatin, from Bethyl Laboratories (Montgomery, TX) and Novus Biologicals (Littleton, CO), were also used, and gave the same results. Ab was identified with mouse monoclonal antibody 6E10 against amino acid residues 1-17 (Signet, Dedham, MA) diluted 1:100, which morphologically recognizes Ab in both Alzheimer's disease brain [7] and s-IBM muscle [3].

To block nonspecific binding of an antibody to Fc receptors, sections were preincubated with normal goat or donkey serum diluted 1:10 [3,12,18,19]. Controls for staining specificity were omission of the primary antibody, or its replacement with nonimmune sera or irrelevant antibody; these were always negative.

Immune-electron microscopy

This was done on 10-lm unfixed frozen sections [3,12,18,19]. For double immunolocalization, sections were incubated concurrently in a rabbit polyclonal antibody against myostatin combined with the mouse monoclonal antibody 6E10 against Ab, followed by incubation in two different species-specific secondary antibodies conjugated either to 10-or 5-nm gold particles [3,12,18,19]. The sections were then processed for electron microscopy [3,12,18,19].

Immunoblots

Immunoblots were performed as described [18,19]. Briefly, five 20-lm-thick frozen muscle sections were collected at À25°C and rapidly homogenized on ice in 10 mM TRIS-HCl, pH 7.4, containing 150 mM NaCl, 15 mM EDTA, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Diagnostic, Mannheim, Germany). Protein concentration was measured by the Bradford method. Protein, 20 lg in 4• NuPage LDS sample buffer and 10• NuPage sample reducing agent was heat-denatured for 10 min at 70°C. Subsequently, proteins were electrophoretically separated using 12% Bis-TRIS gel and 1• NuPAGE MES SDS running buffer. After electrophoresis, samples were transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane for 1 h at 30 V, in 1• NuPAGE transfer buffer. All reagents were obtained from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA). Nitrocellulose membranes were blocked in 5% (wt/vol) blocking reagent (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Piscataway, NJ) in 1• TBS plus 0.1% Tween 20, and they were incubated overnight at 4°C with an anti-myostatin antibody diluted 1:1,000. After being washed, the membrane was incubated with an appropriate species-specific secondary antibody conjugated to horseradish peroxidase. The blots were developed using the enhanced chemiluminescence system (Amersham). Protein loading was evaluated by actin bands visualized with a mouse monoclonal anti-actin antibody (Santa Cruz, CA), diluted 1:1,000. Omission of a primary antibody was the control for reaction specificity. Immunoblots of a recombinant human myostatin peptide (Research Diagnostic, Flanders, NJ ) were used as an additional control for the antibody specificity. 

Combined Immunoprecipitation/Immunoblot

To evaluate whether myostatin physically associates with Ab, a combined immunoprecipitation/immunoblot technique was performed as described [18,19]: 100 lg total muscle protein from s-IBM and control muscle biopsy specimens were immunoprecipitated in precipitation buffer containing 5 lg 6E10 antibody [18,19]. The immunoprecipitates were electrophoresed and immunoblotted using an anti-myostatin antibody, followed by a secondary antibody. To confirm the specificity of the immunoprecipitation reaction, either 6E10 antibody was replaced with normal mouse serum, or the antimyostatin antibody used for immunoblotting was omitted.

Results

Light-microscopic immunocytochemistry

In all s-IBM biopsy samples, on a given cross-section, 70-80% of the vacuolated muscle fibers and approximately 15% of non-vacuolated ones contained, mainly in their non-vacuolated cytoplasm, various-sized dotty, rounded or slightly elongated myostatin-immunoreactive aggregates (Fig. 1). By double immunofluorescence, all fibers containing myostatin-immunoreactive aggregates also contained Ab-immunoreactive aggregates, and within individual fibers they co-localized with each other (Fig. 1).

None of the control diseased or normal biopsy material had muscle fibers containing myostatin-immu-noreactive aggregates. Atrophic muscle fibers in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and peripheral neuropathy muscle biopsy samples did not have increased myostatin immunoreactivity.

Electron microscopic immunocytochemistry

Using double-label gold immune electron microscopy, in s-IBM muscle fibers, both myostatin and Ab were associated together with the 6-10 nm amyloid-like fibrils, and floccular and amorphous material (Fig. 2).

Immunoblots

Immunoblots of s-IBM muscle biopsy material revealed two very strong bands, one corresponding to a myostatin dimer at 28 kDa, and the other to the myostatin precursor protein at 55 kDa (Fig. 3). Control muscle biopsy samples had only very weak bands at 28 and 55 kDa (Fig. 3). Omission of a primary antibody resulted in no bands being present (Fig. 3). Immunoblots of human recombinant myostatin peptide revealed a very strong 14-kDa myostatin monomer and a weak 28-kDa myostatin dimer (Fig. 3).

Immunoprecipitation

Immunoprecipitation with 6E10 antibody, followed by immunoblotting with anti-myostatin antibody revealed a 55-kDa band corresponding to myostatin precursor protein in s-IBM muscle biopsy specimens, while control muscle did not have a detectable band (Fig. 3). Control experiments were negative; details in the legend to Fig. 3.

Discussion

Our studies demonstrate for the first time that within s-IBM muscle fibers: (1) myostatin/myostatin precursor accumulates and associates with aggregates containing Ab, at both the light and electron microscopic level; (2) expressions of myostatin precursor protein and the myostatin dimer are increased; and (3) myostatin precursor protein physically associates with Ab, identifying Ab as its novel binding partner.

As in previous studies of human and mouse muscle tissues using the same antibodies [5,14] and studies of bovine muscle tissue using a different antibody [17], we did not detect myostatin monomer in either s-IBM or control muscle biopsy specimens.

Myostatin is synthesized as a precursor protein, and its monomers form disulfide-linked dimers [4,6,10]. Processing of myostatin from myostatin precursor protein has been proposed to occur intracellularly, possibly through the action of furin [6].

Myostatin is considered to be a secreted protein [4,10] that exerts its influence through extracellular signaling induced by autocrine/paracrine action, achieved by its interaction with the activin/TGF-b ActIIb receptor on the muscle fiber [10,15]. Outside the muscle fiber, myostatin is proposed to be inactivated by its binding to follistatin, which inhibits myostatin binding to its receptors on muscle fibers [4,10]. The role of myostatin within the muscle fiber and its intracellular binding partners remain to be studied.

Our data showing increased expression of myostatin and myostatin precursor, and the co-localization and physical association with Ab within s-IBM muscle fibers, suggest that myostatin/myostatin precursor may exert a novel intracellular influence. While we propose that this influence is detrimental, there are several questions. For example, it is not known whether within the s-IBM muscle fibers increased myostatin/myostatin-precursor is detrimental by itself, or it possibly ''toxifies'' intracellular soluble Ab by causing its oligomerization, and possibly it negatively influences other proteins. Also to be considered is whether the binding of Ab to myostatin precursor causes post-translational changes in the latter that might modify its proteolytic processing, degradation and traffic, resulting in increased accumulation of myostatin precursor and myostatin dimer within s-IBM muscle fibers. While those questions remain to be addressed, an immediate practical possibility is that decreasing myostatin/myostatin precursor might be a therapeutic measure in s-IBM. For example, previous treatment with growth hormone significantly decreased myostatin levels in growth hormone-deficient patients and a normal mouse myoblast cell-line [8]. Accordingly, growth hormone might be considered an anti-myostatin therapeutic candidate for s-IBM. Other possibly therapeutic anti-myostatin compounds can be considered when they become available for human use.

Fig. 3 Immunoblots of three s-IBM biopsy homogenates demonstrate a very strong expression of myostatin dimer (28 kDa) and myostatin precursor (55 kDa), while the two normal control (C) muscle biopsy specimens have only very weak bands. The actin band shows the protein loading in each specimen. To confirm the specificity of the antibody, either anti-myostatin antibody was omitted and the blot was reacted with a secondary antibody only, or immunoblotting of the recombinant human myostatin was performed, which revealed two bands (28-kDa dimer, and 14-kDa monomer). Immunoprecipitations of control (lane 3) and s-IBM (lane 4) muscle biopsy tissue with 6E10 antibody against Ab, followed by immunoprobing with the antibody against myostatin, revealed a strong 55-kDa band corresponding to the myostatin precursor in s-IBM muscle (lane 4), while the normal muscle (lane 3) has virtually no band. To confirm the specificity of the immunoprecipitation experiment in s-IBM muscle, either antimyostatin antibody was omitted in the immunoprobing and the blot was reacted with a secondary antibody only (lane 1), or 6E10 antibody was replaced with normal mouse serum (lane 2)-these two controls resulted in the absence of specific bands

Acknowledgments This study was supported by grants (to V.A.) from the National Institutes of Health (AG16768 Merit Award), the Myositis Association, the Muscular Dystrophy Association, and the Helen Lewis Research Fund. S.W. is on leave from the Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland. Maggie Baburyan provided excellent technical assistance in electron microscopy.

Conflict of interest: No information supplied

Fig. 11Fig. 1 Immunofluorescence showing myostatin-immunoreactive aggregates in s-IBM abnormal muscle fibers (A, B), and their colocalization with Ab by double immunofluorescence (C-F) (s-IBM sporadic inclusion-body myositis, Ab amyloid-b). Original magnification •1,250

Fig. 22Fig. 2 Single-label (A, B) and double-label (C-E) gold immune electron microscopy within s-IBM muscle fibers. A, B Myostatin is immunolocalized on the inner side of the nuclear membrane in normal (A) and s-IBM (B) muscle fibers. C-E In s-IBM muscle fibers myostatin (5-nm gold particles) and Ab (10-nm gold particles) are associated with 6-10 nm diameter amyloid-like fibrils, and with amorphous and floccular material. A, B •51,000; C •115,000; D •85,000; E •61,000

