Molecular pathology and pathogenesis of inclusion-body myositis

We summarize the molecular phenotype, diagnostic criteria, and the newest advances related to seeking the pathogenic mechanism(s) of sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM), a muscle disease usually of persons over age 50. On the basis of our research, several processes seem to be important in relation to the still-speculative pathogenesis: 1) increased transcription and accumulation of amyloid-b precursor protein (AbPP), and accumulation of its proteolytic fragment Ab; 2) abnormal accumulation of cholesterol, caveolin-1, and apolipoprotein E; 3) oxidative stress; 4) accumulations of intramuscle fiber multiprotein aggregates; and 5) evidence that unfolded/misfolded proteins participate in s-IBM pathogenesis. Our basic hypothesis is that overexpression of AbPP within the aging muscle fibers is an early upstream event causing a subsequent pathogenic cascade.

INTRODUCTION

The term ''inclusion-body myositis'' (IBM) designated a subset of patients with chronic polymyositis whose muscle biopsies have, in addition to inflammation, muscle fibers containing 1) vacuoles, and 2) characteristic filamentous inclusions within the cytoplasm and nuclei. Sporadic IBM (s-IBM) is the most common muscle disease beginning after age 50, which leads to severe disability (reviewed by Askanas and Engel, 2001, 2002, 2003). Interest in s-IBM has been increased by a) the recent identification within IBM muscle fibers of b-pleated-sheet amyloid (Mendell et al., 1991;Askanas et al., 1992a) and other striking pathologic features that were not believed to occur in diseased human muscle, and b) the remarkable parallels of those features with ones typically present in Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain (reviewed by Askanas and Engel, 2001). For example, the most characteristic feature of the s-IBM muscle-fiber pathologic phenotype is accumulation of intramuscle-fiber multiprotein aggregates containing either amyloid-b (Ab) or phosphorylated tau (p-tau) (Askanas and Engel, 2001). Both types of aggregates contain ubiquitin and several other accumulated proteins (Askanas and Engel, 2001, 2002, 2003), including markers of oxidative stress (Yang et al., 1996) and cholesterol (Jaworska-Wilczynska et al., 2002). Their possible pathogenetic significance is addressed below.

Traditionally, s-IBM has been considered an inflammatory myopathy, together with polymyositis and dermatomyositis, and several reviews have addressed the inflammatory aspects of those disorders (Dalakas, 2001;Hilton-Jones, 2001;Mastaglia et al., 2003). However, while the inflammatory component of s-IBM muscle biopsies is indisputable, its pathogenic significance is uncertain because s-IBM patients as a group respond poorly to anti-dysimmune treatment, in contrast to polymyositis and dermatomyositis patients (Askanas and Engel, 2001;Hilton-Jones, 2001;Mastaglia et al., 2003).

In s-IBM we have proposed that the milieu of the aging muscle fiber is important in promoting: 1) development of the IBM-characteristic progressive vacuolar degeneration; and 2) the characteristic ectopic expression of several potentially toxic proteins, which may underlie disease progression. The aging milieu of the s-IBM musclefiber and of total-patient may also influence provocation of, and/or response to, the lymphocytic inflammation (reviewed by Askanas andEngel, 2002, 2003).

Accordingly, we postulate that s-IBM is essentially a degenerative muscle disease 1) occurring in an aged muscle cellular environment; 2) associated with intracellular accumulation and aggregation of several proteins; and 3) involving abnormal signal transduction and transcription, all of which lead to the IBM-specific characteristic muscle degenerative process.

In this review we describe what seem to be the most important molecular aspects of the s-IBM muscle fiber phenotype and our newest considerations of s-IBM pathogenesis.

MORPHOLOGIC DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA

OF S-IBM Light-Microscopic Histochemistry and Immunocytochemistry Characteristic light-microscopic pathologic features of s-IBM evident with the Engel-Gomori trichrome stain (Engel and Cunningham, 1963) are: 1) muscle fibers with one or several, irregular and various-sized, vacuoles on a given 10-mm thick fresh-frozen cross-section, and 2) various degrees of lymphocytic inflammation, with some macrophages (Fig. 1). In contrast to what is commonly stated, many vacuoles in IBM are either not ''rimmed'' or only slightly rimmed. In a given section, 60-80% of the s-IBM vacuolated muscle fibers contain amyloid foci positive with Congo-red, thioflavin-s, and crystal violet. Because amyloid deposits can be very small and sometimes present in only a few muscle fibers, they can often be missed if examined only by Congo-red visualized through polarizing filters, thioflavin-s, or crystal violet. The fluorescenceenhanced Congo-red technique described previously greatly facilitates identification of amyloid deposits (Askanas et al., 1993a). We recommend the following morphologic criteria to diagnose s-IBM:

1. Engel-Gomori trichrome staining to visualize vacuolated muscle fibers, mononuclear-cell inflammation, and the occasional ragged-red fibers. 2. The Askanas fluorescence-enhanced Congo-red staining to visualize intramuscle fiber congophilia. 3. Immunocytochemical staining for the presence of paired-helical filaments (PHFs) utilizing SMI-31 monoclonal antibody, which recognizes the phosphorylated tau of PHFs in s-IBM (Askanas et al., 1996a;Mirabella et al., 1996a) and AD (Ksiezak-Reding et al., 1987) (although originally made to react with the phosphorylated heavy-chain of neurofilaments). 4. Ubiquitin immunoreactivity within muscle fibers can be used to differentiate s-IBM from polymyositis if SMI-31 antibody is not available (Askanas et al., 1992b). Ubiquitin-positive inclusions can be identified in both fresh-frozen and formalin-fixed paraffinembedded muscle biopsies of s-IBM patients, but not in any other inflammatory myopathies (Askanas et al., 1992b;Prayson and Cohen, 1997).

Ultrastructural Abnormalities of s-IBM Vacuolated, and Some Nonvacuolated, Muscle Fibers Characteristic are PHFs, often in clusters, strikingly resembling PHFs of AD brain, being 15-21 nm in diameter and containing phosphorylated tau (Fig. 2) (reviewed by Askanas and Engel, 2001). PHFs are present in both vacuolated and nonvacuolated muscle fibers. In 2-6% of s-IBM muscle nuclei there are clusters (inclusions) of 15-21 nm ''tubulofilaments,'' which in favorable sections are seen to be paired-helical filaments like those in the cytoplasm.

The s-IBM vacuolated muscle-fiber cytoplasm, and often cytoplasm of the nonvacuolated muscle fibers, also contain Ab-positive: 1) collections of 6-10 nm fila- ments (Fig. 2); 2) fine flocculomembranous material; and 3) amorphous material (Askanas et al., 1992b(Askanas et al., , 1993b)). Myelin-like whorls and other lysosomal debris are present in the vacuolated fibers. Ultrastructurally abnormal mitochondria containing paracrystalline inclusions are occasionally present.

EVIDENCE FOR INTRACELLULAR TOXICITY

OF AbPP/Ab IBM PATHOGENESIS We have proposed that increased intracellular expression and accumulation of amyloid-b precursor protein (AbPP) and Ab, and possibly Ab oligomers, play a key upstream role in the s-IBM pathogenesis by: 1) causing abnormal signal transduction to modulating other genes; 2) binding to and adversely modifying the role of various normal intracellular proteins; 3) trapping potentially other toxic proteins and cholesterol; 4) inducing oxidative stress; and 5) producing mitochondrial and other abnormalities (reviewed by Askanas andEngel, 2002, 2003). (The recent concept of a putative toxicity of small proteolytic fragments of Ab in AD [Klein, 2002] could also apply intracellularly to IBM.) This proposal is supported by studies showing that: a) experimental overexpression of AbPP through direct AbPP gene transfer into human normal, cultured muscle fibers induced most of the basic aspects of the IBM phenotype (Askanas et al., 1996b(Askanas et al., , 1997)); b) in hereditary-IBM cultured muscle fibers, the genetically determined AbPP overexpression preceded other IBMlike abnormalities (McFerrin et al., 2000); and c) both experimentally and genetically AbPP-overexpressing cultured muscle fibers had abnormal neuromuscular junctions (NMJs) and could not become innervated by cocultured fetal-rat spinal-cord neurons (McFerrin et al., 1998). Based on the last finding and our IBM muscle-biopsy observation (Alvarez et al., 2000), we postulated that spontaneous AbPP overexpression in s-IBM patient muscle fibers may be responsible for a ''myogenous dysinnervation'' (Askanas and al., 2001) and for the observed NMJ structural abnormalities (Alvarez et al., 2000). The neuromuscular synapse pathology in IBM has a parallel in the synapse pathology of AD (Terry, 1996) which, by analogy with IBM, we propose may reflect an intracellular postsynaptic pathogenic mechanism.

Additional support of our intracellular AbPP/Ab hypothesis of IBM pathogenesis was provided by transgenic mouse models overexpressing AbPP in muscle fibers (Jin et al., 1998;Fukuchi et al., 1998). Based on the likely intracellular toxicity of AbPP/Ab in s-IBM muscle fibers, we have suggested that a similar intracellular may be occurring in AD neurons and possibly astroglia (Askanas and Engel, 1998a).

INCREASED TRANSCRIPTION OF AbPP

AND ITS ABNORMAL PROCESSING WITHIN S-IBM MUSCLE FIBERS Ab and C-and N-terminal epitopes of AbPP are abnormally accumulated in vacuolated and nonvacuolated regions of s-IBM muscle fibers (Askanas et al., 1992b(Askanas et al., , 1993b)). s-IBM muscle fibers have increased mRNA signal for the AbPP-751 alternatively spliced transcript that contains the Kunitz-type protease inhibitor (KPI) motif (Sarkozi et al., 1993). The increased AbPP-mRNA colocalizes in the same foci as the abnormal accumulations of AbPP and Ab immunoreactive epitopes (Sarkozi et al., 1993). The mechanism of AbPP overproduction in s-IBM is not clarified, but our recent studies suggest that the AP-1 transcription complex, composed of c-Jun and c-Fos, may play a role (reviewed and referenced in Askanas and Engel, 2001).

Jun/Ap-1 and protein kinase C have been shown to play a role in AbPP transcription (Trejo et al., 1994). Since c-Jun, c-Fos (Broccolini et al., 2000b), ERK (Wilczynski et al., 2000), and PKC (Askanas et al., unpubl. data) are increased in IBM muscle fibers, they may play a role in the AbPP overexpression.

Also increased in IBM muscle is Redox-factor-1 (Ref-1) (Broccolini et al., 2000a), a protein possessing apurinic/apyrimidic endonuclease activity, as well as the ability to increase the affinity of AP1 for its binding site in the promoter region of several target genes including AbPP, thereby modulating their transcription. Ref-1 also enhances binding of the transcription factor nuclear factor-kB (NFkB) to DNA, thus participating in the increased transcription of several genes, including AbPP. Oxidative stress induces Ref-1 activation. IBM muscle fibers contain increased NFkB (Yang et al., 1998) and markers of oxidative stress (Yang et al., 1996), which might also be involved in the increased AbPP transcription. RNA polymerase II is also increased in IBM fibers (Wilczynski et al., 2001), another sign suggesting increased transcription activity.

Recently, we have demonstrated that the machinery for abnormal processing of AbPP, leading to the increased generation of the toxic Ab42 fragment, exists in s-IBM muscle fibers. Those include the following: 1) BACE1 and BACE2, glycosylated transmembrane proteins, which are recently discovered b-secretases that cleave AbPP at the N-terminal of Ab (Sinha et al., 1999;Acquati et al., 2000;Hussain et al., 2000). BACE1 and BACE2 are increased in s-IBM muscle fibers, where they are accumulated in the form of inclusions colocalizing with Ab (Vattemi et al., 2001(Vattemi et al., , 2003a)). In addition, both BACEs coimmunoprecipitate with AbPP in s-IBM muscle, providing novel evidence that they may participate in AbPP processing and abnormal generation of Ab there. 2) Nicastrin and presenilins (PSs), which are components of the g-secretase system that cleaves AbPP at the C-terminal of Ab, generating either Ab40 or Ab42 (Sisodia et al., 2001). Nicastrin, PS1, and PS2 are strongly overexpressed in s-IBM muscle fibers, where they i) colocalize with each other and with Ab (Askanas et al., 1998;Vattemi et al., 2003b), and ii) are physically associated with AbPP in s-IBM and AbPP-overexpressing muscle fibers (Vattemi and Askanas, unpubl. obs., 2003), strongly suggesting that those factors participate in the Ab production within IBM muscle fibers. 3) Abnormally accumulated free cholesterol and apolipoprotein E (See below). 4) CystatinC (CC), an endogenous cysteine protease inhibitor, which was previously proposed to participate in Ab deposition within the amyloid plaques AD brain (Deng et al., 2001;Levy et al., 2001). Within biopsied s-IBM muscle fibers, CC is strongly immunoreactive in the form of inclusions that ultrastructurally colocalize with the Ab immunoreactivity; CC's total expression is strongly increased, and it coimmunoprecipitated with AbPP (Vattemi et al., 2003c). Our studies demonstrate for the first time that CC physically associates with AbPP, suggesting that it possibly influences ABPP processing as well as Ab deposition.

Accordingly, the mechanisms participating both in the increased transcription of AbPP and its abnormal processing seem to be overoperating within s-IBM muscle fibers.

CHOLESTEROL AND RELATED MECHANISMS IN THE IBM PATHOGENESIS

Free cholesterol is abnormally accumulated in IBM muscle fibers (Jaworska-Wilczynska et al., 2002). It colocalizes with abnormally accumulated Ab, phosphorylated tau, and caveolin-1 (Jaworska- Wilczynska et al., 2003;Keffi et al., 2002). In addition to being abnormally accumulated within s-IBM muscle fibers, caveolin-1, a major protein of plasmalemmal microdomain caveolae and an intracellular transporter of cholesterol (Fielding and Fielding, 2000), is physically associated with AbPP in the s-IBM muscle fibers, suggesting its having a direct role in AbPP processing (Vattemi and Askanas, unpubl. obs., 2003). In nonmuscle-cells, experimental loading with cholesterol increases Ab production and amyloidogenesis (referenced in Jaworsk-Wilczynska et al., 2002), and in AbPP-overexpressing cultured human muscle fibers exposure to cholesterol induces Ab-deposition and overexpression of caveolin-1 (McFerrin et al., 2002). We therefore propose that within s-IBM muscle fibers cholesterol, instead of being properly metabolized or cleared, is deposited, with caveolin-1, at sites of Ab accumulation and possibly at sites of AbPP processing, where it might adversely increase Ab production and induce Ab misfolding and aggregation.

ApoE is abnormally accumulated within s-IBM muscle fibers (Mirabella et al., 1996b). Its light-microscopic localization is in the form of intracellular inclusions that closely colocalize with phosphorylated-tau and Ab. Ultrastructurally, it is localized to PHFs, 6-10 nm filaments, and amorphous material. Because ApoE-mRNA is not present in IBM abnormal muscle fibers (Mirabella et al., 1996b), we postulate that ApoE is transported from the circulation into those fibers through the low-density-lipoprotein receptors. In AD, Rosenberg (2000) addressed the possible pathogenic role of neuronal lipoprotein-receptor-related protein (LRP), including its function in transporting ApoE, AbPP, cholesterol, and a-2 macroglobulin. In IBM muscle the roles of ApoE and its transport receptor need to be studied. Because ApoE binds to b-pleatedsheet amyloid produced by various proteins and to Ab (reviewed by Rosenberg, 2000;Askanas and Engel, 1998a), it is possible that after transport of ApoE into IBM abnormal muscle fibers it is captured by Ab and further enhances Ab fibrillogenesis. In sporadic and late-onset-familial forms of AD an increased frequency of the ApoE 4 allele is associated with earlier clinical onset (reviewed by Rosenberg, 2000). In s-IBM patients the ApoE 4 allele was not preferentially increased in two studies, but one group did report an increase (referenced in Askanas and Engel, 1998b).

OXIDATIVE STRESS HAS A POSSIBLE INFLUENCE IN THE PATHOGENIC CASCADE OF S-IBM

There is increasing evidence that free-radical toxicity may participate in the IBM pathogenesis. Indicators of oxidative stress, as well as enzymes participat-ing in the cellular defense against oxidative stress, are accumulated in IBM muscle fibers (Yang et al., 1996(Yang et al., , 1998;;Broccolini et al., 2000a;reviewed by Askanas andEngel, 1998b, 2001).

POSSIBLE MECHANISMS UNDERLYING FORMATION OF THE INCLUSION-BODIES

IN THE IBM MUSCLE FIBERS Diseases characterized by protein misfolding and aggregation are considered ''conformational diseases'' (reviewed by Garcia-Mata et al., 2002;Kopito and Ron, 2000). Aggregations of proteins into insoluble intracellular protein-complexes and inclusion-bodies have been proposed to be importantly related to several neurodegenerative disorders (McNaught et al., 2003;Keller et al., 2000;Schmidt et al., 2002). Some of the proteins accumulated in s-IBM muscle fibers within the inclusions/aggregates, such as a-synuclein, cellular prion protein, presenilin1, and SOD1 (reviewed in Askanas and Engel, 20001, 2003) have, similar to Ab and tau, a propensity to unfold, misfold, and form b-pleated sheet amyloid (Borden, 1998;Martin and Surewicz, 2001). Accordingly, we postulate that formation of the IBMcharacteristic ubiquitinated multiprotein-inclusions in s-IBM muscle is due to protein unfolding and misfolding. Unfolding or misfolding of erstwhile normal proteins can occur in vivo and in vitro under several circumstances, including macromolecular crowding, oxidative stress, exposure to toxins and ''aging.'' Markers of oxidative stress are increased in muscle fibers of s-IBM, and there is increased transcription of several genes, viz., AbPP-751, cellular prion protein, enzymes involved in cellular defense against oxidative stress and c-Jun. Those factors might be contributing to increased transcription, impaired disposal (see below), and abnormal accumulation and crowding of proteins leading to their unfolding, possibly abnormal glycosylation, and other deleterious consequences to the proteins and the muscle cell function. The actual mechanisms preceding and leading to the formation of the inclusion-bodies in s-IBM muscle are now gradually being veiled.

Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress

Various factors, including the presence of misfolded proteins, oxidative stress, and abnormally glycosylated proteins, can interfere with endoplasmic reticulum (ER) function leading to ER stress (ERS) (reviewed by Mori, 2000;Lee, 2001;Kaufman, 2002). Unfolded protein response (UPR) is a mechanism by which cells attempt to protect themselves against ERS (Kaufman, 2002). It involves upregulation of several classes of ER chaperone proteins, whose main functions are to: 1) facilitate folding of the unfolded proteins, and 2) prevent protein aggregation. In s-IBM muscle fibers there are abnormal focal accumulations of five ER chaperones: BiP/GRP78, GRP94, Erp72, calreticulin, and calnexin, each of which colocalizes with Ab (Vattemi et al., 2004). Moreover, each of these five ER chaperones physically associates with AbPP/Ab in s-IBM muscle (Vattemi et al., 2004), suggesting that they may have a role in attempting to fold AbPP and/or Ab. Accordingly, the ERS and UPR in s-IBM muscle fibers strongly suggest that unfolded/misfolded proteins participate in the pathogenic cascade.

Transcription Errors; Accumulation of Mutated Ubiquitin (UBB +1 ) UBB þ1 is produced by an acquired transcriptional error, a ''molecular misreading,'' typically in an aging cellular environment. The aberrant transcripts are formed as a result of dinucleotide loss during or after transcription, and can be translated from the deletion onward into the þ1 reading frame (van Leeuwen et al., 1998(van Leeuwen et al., , 2000)). UBB þ1 was recently shown to be accumulated in AD brain (van Leeuwen et al., 1998(van Leeuwen et al., , 2000)). UBB þ1 is definitely accumulated in s-IBM muscle fibers, where it colocalizes with Ab and p-tau (Fratta et al., 2004a). Aging and oxidative stress are possible facilitators of UBB þ1 accumulation in AD brain, and they may be similarly facilatory in s-IBM muscle fibers. UBB þ1 is toxic to cells because its ubiquitinated form inhibits proteasome (Lindsten et al., 2002) and there may be other toxic mechanisms.

Inhibition of Proteasome and

Aggresome Formation The ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) is the main protein degradation pathway in eukaryotic cells (Voges et al., 1999;Ciechanover and Brundin, 2003). It is involved in elimination of a variety of proteins, including short-lived-normal proteins and misfolded or otherwise damaged proteins. UPS inhibition leads to intracellular accumulation and aggregation of misfolded/ unfolded proteins (Shoesmith et al., 2003;Kopito and Ron, 2000;Bennett et al., 2005), and formation of organized structures termed aggresomes (Johnson et al., 1998;Wigley, 1999;Kopito, 2000). In addition to containing various misfolded proteins, aggresomes, characterized by their containing g-tubulin immunoreactivity, typically also contain ubiquitin, proteasome subunits, heat shock protein (Hsp)70, and other proteins. In s-IBM muscle fibers we have recently demonstrated proteasomal dysfunction, as evidenced by: 1) accumulation of subunits of the 26S proteasome; 2) decreased proteasomal activity; and 3) accumulation of aggresomes (Fratta et al., 2003(Fratta et al., , 2004b;;Fratta et al., 2005). Thus, proteasomal abnormalities may play an important role in the s-IBM pathogenesis. We propose that the unfolded/misfolded proteins might be responsible for cellular toxicity prior to their binding to each other and their final aggregation into inclusions bodies.

It is possible that after becoming aggregated, malfolded proteins have reduced, or perhaps no, cytotoxicity.

CONCLUSION

We have presented what we consider the most relevant findings related to the pathogenesis of s-IBM. These have not yet provided a definitive cause and treatment, but they have pointed to potentially exciting avenues for exploring treatment approaches to benefiting s-IBM patients. Examples are identification of factors that would: 1) decrease intramuscle fiber expressions of band g-secretases which might lead to decreased production of intracellularly toxic oligomeric Ab42; 2) detoxify free radicals or prevent their formation within muscle fibers; 3) prevent misfolding/unfolding of muscle-fiber proteins and/or enhance their disposal; and 4) decrease protein aggregation.

National Institutes of Health; Contract grant number: AG16768 Merit Award (to VA); Grant sponsors: Muscular Dystrophy Association, Myositis Association, Helen Lewis Research Fund.

Fig. 1 .1Fig. 1. Light-microscopic features of s-IBM muscle biopsy. A,B: Engel Trichrome staining demonstrating vacuolated muscle fibers and mononuclear inflammation (A), and vacuolated and atrophic muscle fibers in (B). C,D: Congo-red staining visualized through Texas-red filters and epifluorescence illumination shows amyloid deposits within abnormal muscle fibers. E: Characteristic squiggly inclusions stained with SMI-31 antibody in abnormal muscle fibers. All Â1,250.

Fig. 2 .2Fig. 2. Electron microscopic features of s-IBM muscle. A: Several paired helical filaments (PHFs) in transmission electron-microscopy. B,C: Clusters of PHFs stained with SMI-31 and processed for goldimmunoelectron-microscopy (B), and horseradish-immunoperoxidase (C), demonstrating that only PHFs are stained with SMI-31, whereas the adjacent portions of myofibers are not immunostained. D-F: Gold-immunoelectron-microscopy of Ab demonstrates its localization on 6-10 nm fibrils and floccular and amorphous material. A: Â80,000; B,D: Â53,000; C,E,F: Â46,000.

