Neprilysin participates in skeletal muscle regeneration and is accumulated in abnormal muscle fibres of inclusion body myositis

, a metallopeptidase originally shown to modulate signalling events by degrading small regulatory peptides, is also an amyloid-b-(Ab) degrading enzyme. We investigated a possible role of NEP in inclusion body myositis (IBM) and other acquired and hereditary muscle disorders and found that in all myopathies NEP expression was directly associated with the degree of muscle fibre regeneration. In IBM muscle, NEP protein was also strongly accumulated in Ab-bearing abnormal fibres. In vitro, during the experimental differentiation of myoblasts, NEP protein expression was regulated at the post-transcriptional level with a rapid increase in the early stage of myoblast differentiation followed by a gradual reduction thereafter, coincident with the progression of the myogenic programme. Treatment of dif-ferentiating muscle cells with the NEP inhibitor DL-3-mercapto-2-benzylpropanoylglycine resulted in impaired differentiation that was mainly associated with an abnormal regulation of Akt activation. Therefore, NEP may play an important role during muscle cell differentiation, possibly through the regulation, either directly or indirectly, of the insulin-like growth factor I-driven myogenic programme. In IBM muscle increased NEP may be instrumental in (i) reducing the Ab accumulation in vulnerable fibres and (ii) promoting a repair/regenerative attempt of muscle fibres possibly through the modulation of insulin-like growth factor I-dependent pathways.

The zinc metallopeptidase neprilysin (NEP; EP24.11, also known as CALLA, CD10 and enkephalinase) is a neutral endopeptidase belonging to the M13 MEROPS family of 'gluzincins' (Rawlings et al. 2004; MEROPS peptidase database http://merops.sanger.ac.uk) that was originally described in the brush-border membranes of rabbit kidney (Kerr and Kenny 1974). NEP is a type II integral membrane protein expressed in different tissues and consisting of a short Nterminal cytoplasmic domain, a transmembrane hydrophobic region and a large extracellular domain that contains the catalytic site (Devault et al. 1987). Due to its structural features and location on the cell surface, NEP is able to hydrolyse small peptides in the immediacy of the plasma membrane. Indeed, in the CNS NEP regulates the level of neuropeptides, such as enkephalines and substance P, close to the peptidergic synapses (Turner et al. 2001). Outside the nervous system, NEP modulates the activity of regulatory peptides involved in the control of local blood flow (Vaghy et al. 1995). More recent studies have revealed new and unpredicted functions of this peptidase by showing that NEP is involved in the molecular mechanisms of cell growth and cancer (Papandreou et al. 1998;Sumitomo et al. 2000Sumitomo et al. , 2004)). In addition, NEP has been shown to cleave amyloid-b (Ab) at multiple sites (Howell et al. 1995) and may play a role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease through the regulation of Ab levels in the brain (Akiyama et al. 2001;Iwata et al. 2001;Leissring et al. 2003). In skeletal muscle, recent studies have shown a region-specific and age-related variation of NEP expression, thus suggesting that it may also be involved in the pathogenic mechanisms underlying some degenerative disorders of muscle such as sporadic inclusion body myositis (IBM) (Caccamo et al. 2005).

Inclusion body myositis is the most frequent acquired myopathy occurring in older patients (Askanas and Engel 2002). Although numerous lines of evidence suggest an immuno-mediated pathogenic mechanism (i.e. presence of endomysial inflammation with increased production of proinflammatory cytokines), patients with IBM respond poorly to immunosuppressive treatments. In addition, IBM muscle is characterized by a peculiar array of pathological features, including (i) vacuolated muscle fibres and (ii) the abnormal accumulation of proteins commonly observed in Alzheimer's disease brain such as Ab and hyperphosphorylated tau (Mirabella et al. 1996a;Askanas and Engel 2002), that strongly argue in favour of a degenerative nature of this disorder.

In the present study we investigated the expression and possible functional significance of NEP in IBM and in human primary muscle cultures.

Materials and methods

Patients

Diagnosis of all patients was based on both clinical evaluation and laboratory studies. Morphological and biochemical studies were conducted on diagnostic muscle biopsies obtained after informed consent from five patients with clinical features indicative of IBM (age of onset over 50 years, muscle weakness in both proximal and distal compartments of four limbs, thinning of the forearm muscles and prominent involvement of the quadriceps). All specimens showed typical morphological characteristics of IBM, including the presence of (i) inflammatory cells often invading non-necrotic fibres; (ii) muscle fibres with rimmed vacuoles; (iii) Congo redpositive deposits within the muscle fibres; (iv) SMI 31-immunoreactive cytoplasmic inclusions and (v) 15-20-nm cytoplasmic filamentous inclusion by electron microscopy analysis (Mirabella et al. 1996a;Askanas and Engel 2002). Controls were polymyositis (n ¼ 4), dermatomyositis (n ¼ 4), Duchenne muscular dystrophy (n ¼ 3), Becker muscular dystrophy (n ¼ 3), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (n ¼ 4), chronic peripheral neuropathies (n ¼ 3) and normal muscles (n ¼ 6). This research was approved by the Ethical Committee of Catholic University.

Primary muscle cultures

Human primary muscle cultures were obtained from the biopsies of five normal control patients using the explantation re-explantation method as previously described (Askanas and Engel 1992). Myoblasts were kept in a replicative state up to the third to fourth passage using a medium containing 15% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (Cambrex Bioscience, Baltimore, MD, USA) and a cocktail of growth factors [growth medium (GM)]. The fusion of subconfluent mononucleated myoblasts into multinucleated myotubes was obtained using a culturing medium with 5% (v/v) fetal bovine serum and without growth factors [differentiation medium (DM)] for 5 days. The fusion index was expressed as number of myonuclei/ number of total nuclei, visualized by Hoechst 33258 staining (Molecular Probes Inc., Eugene, OR, USA) and varied between 0.8 and 0.9 for all of the culture sets used in this study. Reagents used in specific experiments included DL-3-mercapto-2-benzylpropanoyl- glycine (DL-thiorphan) and cycloheximide (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA). DL-thiorphan was resuspended in ethanol at a concentration of 100 mM and kept at )20°C, whereas cycloheximide was dissolved in dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO) at a concentration of 100 mg/mL and kept at 4°C until used.

Immunohistochemistry on muscle biopsies

Immunohistochemistry was performed on 8-lm-thick unfixed cryostat sections as previously described (Broccolini et al. 2004). The following well-characterized primary antibodies were used in either single or double localization experiments: (i) polyclonal anti-NEP (Chemicon, Temecula, CA, USA) diluted 1 : 100; (ii) monoclonal anti-myosin heavy chain developmental type (Novocastra, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) diluted 1 : 50 and (iii) monoclonal anti-Ab (clone 6E10, Biosource International, Camarillo, CA, USA), recognizing Ab protein as well as the parent Ab precursor protein, diluted 1 : 100. The reaction with the primary antibodies was performed for 16-18 h at 4°C, followed by the incubation with the appropriate fluorochrome-conjugated secondary antisera (Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories, West Grove, PA, USA). In control experiments for staining specificity the primary antibody was omitted or replaced by a non-immune serum. When necessary after the immunohistochemical reaction, sections were stained with Hoechst 33258 (Molecular Probes Inc.) to visualize cell nuclei. For quantitative analysis the relative amount of immunopositive fibres was evaluated in at least 500 muscle fibres from four representative low-power microscopic fields of each experimental section.

Western blotting

Diagnostic muscle biopsies and primary muscle cultures were homogenized in Tris-buffered saline containing Triton X-100 and protease inhibitors and stored at )80°C until used. Proteins from conditioned culture media collected from cells were concentrated using Ultrafree-0.5 columns (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Proteins were separated by sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and blotted onto a nitrocellulose membrane (Schleicher & Schuell, Relliehausen, Germany). In experiments using proteins of conditioned culture media the equal loading of samples was confirmed by staining the membrane with Ponceau S (Sigma). Blots were incubated for 16-18 h at 4°C with one of the following antibodies: (i) monoclonal anti-NEP (NCL-CD10-270 clone 56C6, Novocastra) diluted 1 : 80; (ii) monoclonal anti-neural cell adhesion molecule (Chemicon) diluted 1 : 100; (iii) monoclonal anti-myosin heavy chain (Sigma) diluted 1 : 500; (iv) polyclonal anti-phospho-Akt Ser473 (Cell Signaling Technology, Beverly, MA, USA), recognizing the active form of Akt (Datta et al. 1999), diluted 1 : 1000; (v) polyclonal anti-Akt (Cell Signaling Technology) diluted 1 : 500; (vi) polyclonal anti-phospho-ERK1/2 (Cell Signaling Technology), recognizing the active form of ERK1/2, diluted 1 : 1000; (vii) polyclonal anti-ERK1/2 (Cell Signaling Technology) diluted 1 : 1000; (viii) polyclonal anti-insulin-like growth factor-binding protein (IGFBP) 3 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) diluted 1 : 100 and (ix) monoclonal anti-IGFBP-5 (R & D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA) diluted 1 : 100. To confirm an equal loading of samples, all membranes were probed with one of the following monoclonal antibodies against the housekeeping protein: (i) muscle-specific actin (Novocastra, diluted 1 : 2000) when muscle biopsy homogenates were used and (ii) b-actin (Sigma, diluted 1 : 5000) for culture homogenates. After incubation with the appropriate peroxidaseconjugated secondary antibody (Amersham Bioscience, Piscataway, NJ, USA), blots were developed using the ECL Western Blotting Analysis System (Amersham Bioscience). Densitometry on autoradiographic films was carried out using the TotalLab 2.01 software (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK).

Immunocytochemistry on muscle cultures

Human primary muscle cultures were fixed in 4% (w/v) paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer, post-fixed in phosphatebuffered saline containing 0.3% (v/v) Triton-X 100 and blocked with 5% (w/v) bovine serum albumin (Sigma) in phosphate-buffered saline. The following primary antibodies were used: (i) polyclonal anti-NEP (Chemicon) diluted 1 : 50; (ii) monoclonal anti-desmin (Chemicon) diluted 1 : 50 and (iii) monoclonal anti-myosin heavy chain (Sigma) diluted 1 : 100. The reaction with the primary antibodies was performed at 4°C for 16-18 h followed by the incubation with the appropriate fluorochrome-conjugated secondary antisera (Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories). In control experiments the primary antibody was omitted or replaced with a nonimmune serum.

Northern blotting

Total RNA was extracted from experimental cultures using RNA-Trizol reagent, according to the manufacturer's instructions (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Ten lg of total RNA of each sample were electrophoretically separated on a 1% agarose/0.6 M formaldehyde gel, blotted onto a Hybond-N+ membrane (Amersham Biosciences) and cross-linked by UV exposure. NEP and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase probes were generated by PCR from total human cDNA using the following primers: NEP forward, 5¢-ATCAGCCTCTCGGTCCTTG-3¢; NEP reverse, 5¢-TGTAGGT-TCGGCTGAGGCT-3¢ (GenBank Accession no. NM_007289); glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase forward, 5¢-ATGG-GGAAGGTGAAGGTCG-3¢ and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase reverse, 5¢-GTGGGTGTCGCTGTTGAAGTC-3¢ (GenBank Accession no. AY340484). PCR products were radiolabelled with [a-32 P]dCTP (3000 lCi/mM; ICN Biomedicals, Asse, Belgium) using a random primers labelling kit (Invitrogen) and then hybridized on blots in standard hybridization buffer for 16-18 h at 68°C. After high stringency rinsing, the membranes were scanned in a Molecular Imager Typhoon 8006 (Molecular Dynamics, Amersham Biosciences). Band densitometry was assessed as above.

Cell cycle analysis

Subconfluent myoblasts were exposed to DM containing 10 )3 M DL-thiorphan. Sister cultures induced to differentiate in DM without DL-thiorphan were used as controls. Both treated and untreated cells were collected at different time-points (days 1, 2 and 3). Proliferating myoblasts were used to set the baseline. Briefly, cells were harvested and nuclei were isolated and stained for at least 24 h using a solution containing 0.1% (w/v) sodium citrate, 0.1% (v/v) Nonidet-P40, 4 mM EDTA and 50 lg/mL propidium iodide. A flow cytometric DNA ploidy study was performed by analysing a minimum of 10 000 nuclei using a Coulter Ò Epics XL flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter Inc., Fullerton, CA, USA), equipped with an argon laser emitting at 488 nm. Fluorescence signals were collected at 620 nm. Optical alignment and gain setting stability were verified daily with fluorescent microspheres. DNA fluorescence was collected in linear mode and pulse signal processing was used to set a doublet discrimination gate. Cell cycle analysis was performed using the ModFit software (Verity Software, Topsham, ME, USA).

Statistical analysis

All data were expressed as mean ± SE. One-way ANOVA was used to compare differences between groups. When significant differences were observed, a post-hoc multiple comparisons test (Tukey-Kramer test) was conducted. Statistical significance was set at p £ 0.05.

Results

Neprilysin expression in normal and diseased muscle biopsies

In normal muscle fibres NEP was detected along the cytoplasmic membrane, as expected for a transmembrane protein. Interestingly, NEP immunoreactivity was also observed in a variable amount of myonuclei in both normal and diseased muscle biopsies (Fig. 1a). In all myopathies NEP protein expression was increased in small regenerating muscle fibres, identified by a strong expression of myosin heavy chain developmental type, mainly in the form of a diffuse staining on the cytoplasm. However, in many larger myosin heavy chain developmental type-positive fibres, possibly representing myofibres in a more advanced stage of maturation, NEP expression was limited to the cytoplasmic membrane as observed in neighbouring morphologically normal fibres (Fig. 1b).

In IBM muscles, increased NEP immunoreactivity was also observed in 12 ± 2.5% of non-regenerating muscle fibres (identified by lack of immunoreactivity for myosin heavy chain developmental type, Fig. 1b) mainly in the form of a diffuse cytoplasmic staining. These included both vacuolated and non-vacuolated fibres (approximately 50-60% of vacuolated muscle fibres had increased NEP immunoreactivity). In these fibres increased NEP was associated with the accumulation of Ab-immunoreactive cytoplasmic inclusions, representing one of the morphological hallmarks and possibly an upstream pathogenic mechanism of IBM muscle (Askanas and Engel 2002) (Fig. 1c). In all experiments the omission of the primary antibody or its replacement with non-immune serum resulted in a lack of immunoreactivity.

In skeletal muscle neural cell adhesion molecule expression is developmentally regulated as it is increased in the course of muscle fibre development and regeneration, whereas in normal mature myofibres it is restricted to the neuromuscular junction (Baldwin et al. 1996;Winter and Bornemann 1999). Therefore, neural cell adhesion molecule expression can be used bona fide as a definite marker of the degree of myofibre regeneration occurring in a given skeletal muscle sample. By western blot, in all myopathies showing higher levels of neural cell adhesion molecule we observed an increased expression of NEP (identified as a band of 90-100 kDa) compared with that of normal control muscles (Fig. 1c). On average, IBM muscle biopsies showed a 2.65 ± 1.45-fold increase of NEP protein compared with normal muscles (p < 0.05). Similar results were obtained in all other myopathies (2.8 ± 1.55-fold increase in dermatomyositis, 2.3 ± 1.3-fold increase in polymyositis, 2.64 ± 1.4fold increase in Duchenne muscular dystrophies and 2.5 ± 1.3-fold increase in Becker muscular dystrophies), with no statistically significant difference between this group of muscle biopsies and that of IBM. All experiments were run in duplicate and always gave the same results.

Neprilysin protein expression is up-regulated at the post-transcriptional level during differentiation of normal primary myoblasts

The evidence of an increased NEP protein expression in regenerating muscle fibres prompted us to further investigate a possible role of this metalloprotease during skeletal muscle development. Changes of expression of both NEP protein and mRNA were analysed in cultured muscle cells during a 5-day period after the experimental induction of differentiation. The level of NEP protein expression in subconfluent mononucleated myoblasts was set as the baseline. By western blot, an increased expression of NEP was observed as early as 3 h after shifting the cells from GM to DM (not shown). In all of the culture sets used in this study, the level of NEP protein expression progressively increased during the first 2 days (statistical significance was observed at day 2, with a 2.79 ± 0.4-fold NEP increase compared with the level detected in myoblasts; p < 0.05 by Tukey-Kramer test for NEP at day 2 vs. the myoblast NEP level, n ¼ 5) and gradually declined in the other 3 days of observation (2.45 ± 0.35-, 1.45 ± 0.18-and 1.35 ± 0.28-fold increase over myoblast level at days 3, 4 and 5, respectively) with the progression of differentiation, as shown by the increasing levels of myosin (Figs 2a and b). In agreement with this result, by immunocytochemistry, the NEP signal was evidently increased in forming myotubes (day 1 after the induction of differentiation) compared with that detected in myoblasts (identified by strong desmin immunoreactivity, Fig. 2c) and in myosin-positive mature myotubes (5 days after the induction of differentiation, Fig. 2c). NEP immunoreactivity was also identified in virtually all nuclei of myoblasts and myotubes (Fig. 2c). In all immunocytochemistry experiments the omission of the primary antibody or its replacement with non-immune serum resulted in lack of immunoreactivity.

To verify whether changes of NEP protein expression during muscle cell differentiation reflected parallel changes of NEP mRNA levels, we performed northern blot analysis on total RNA extracted from experimental muscle cultures. This showed that NEP mRNA levels did not change during the 5-day period of observation after the induction of myoblast differentiation (Fig. 3a). Therefore, the transient increase of NEP protein expression may result from stabilization of the protein rather than increased transcription of its mRNA. In order to verify this hypothesis, NEP protein expression was analysed by western blot in cultures of subconfluent myoblasts exposed to 35 mM cycloheximide   In muscle cells kept in GM/cycloheximide for 2 days, the NEP level was reduced by 40% at the end-point of the analysis, in agreement with a half-life of 3.7 days as shown in other cell systems (Lorkowski et al. 1987). On the contrary, the NEP protein level remained stable in myoblasts exposed to DM/cycloheximide over the entire time-course of the assay (Fig. 3b). In control experiments, NEP expression was unchanged compared with the baseline level in cultures kept in GM/DMSO during the 2 days of observation (not shown). On the contrary, in subconfluent myoblasts switched to DM/DMSO NEP protein expression progressively increased during days 1 and 2, similar to that observed in previous experiments using DM only. Thus, it appears that an increased stability of the protein mainly contributes to NEP induction during myoblast differentiation in vitro.

Treatment with DL-3-mercapto-2-benzylpropanoylglycine results in impaired myogenesis DL-3-mercapto-2-benzylpropanoylglycine has been previously shown to be a potent inhibitor of NEP in a wide range of experimental settings (Roques et al. 1980;Russell et al. 1996;Iwata et al. 2000;Shirotani et al. 2001;Turner et al. 2001;Marr et al. 2004;Shiiki et al. 2004). To further elucidate the role of the transient increased expression of NEP protein during myogenesis, subconfluent myoblasts were shifted from GM to DM containing DL-thiorphan at a concentration ranging from 10 )7 to 10 )3 M. In control experiments, DM was added with the corresponding volume of the vehicle (ethanol) without DL-thiorphan (DM/vehicle). Upon induction of differentiation, in control cultures exposed to DM/vehicle multinucleated myotubes were already visible at day 1 and by day 5 the experimental fusion of myoblasts into myotubes was completed. On the contrary, in culture sets exposed to DL-thiorphan at the concentration of 10 )3 M there was no increased expression of NEP protein and sparse myotubes were visible only at the end of the assay (day 5, Figs 4a and b). Accordingly, as an indicator of poor muscle cell differentiation, these cultures showed markedly lower levels of myosin expression (22 ± 6.5% compared with control value; p < 0.05 for myosin level of expression in cultures treated with 10 )3 M DL-thiorphan vs. control, n ¼ 5 for each experimental group; Figs 4a and d). DL-thiorphan  inhibited myogenesis in a dose-dependent manner. In fact, an impaired differentiation of myoblasts into myotubes was still observed with concentrations of DL-thiorphan up to 10 )5 M, as suggested by the reduced density of myotubes and lower levels of myosin expression at the end of the assay (day 5, Figs 4b and c) compared with untreated control cultures. However, the progressive reduction of DL-thiorphan in DM resulted in a trend toward increased expression of NEP protein shortly after the induction of differentiation and a higher level of myosin expression at the end of the timecourse (38 ± 7.5 and 55 ± 6% compared with control value when DL-thiorphan was used at a concentration of 10 )4 and 10 )5 M, respectively; p < 0.05 for culture sets treated with either 10 )4 or 10 )5 M DL-thiorphan vs. control, respectively, n ¼ 5 for each experimental group; Figs 4c and d).

DL-thiorphan used at a concentration of 10 )6 M and higher did not show any significant interference with myogenesis in our in vitro system (Fig. 4c). No signs of cell loss were observed in all DL-thiorphan-treated cultures that remained healthy during the entire time-course. Cell cycle analysis showed an identical accumulation of cells in the G 0 /G 1 phase at day 2 (data not shown) for both cultures exposed to DM/vehicle and cultures treated with 10 )3 M DL-thiorphan in DM. This suggests that inhibition of NEP by DL-thiorphan does not interfere with the block of proliferation induced by the differentiating culture conditions. This cell cycle pattern remained similar at day 3 for both treated and untreated muscle cultures.

Exposure of muscle cells to DL-3-mercapto-2- benzylpropanoylglycine impairs myogenic differentiation through a possible alteration of the insulin-like growth factor I/Akt metabolic pathway Insulin-like growth factor (IGF) I is a pleiotropic growth factor, with both endocrine and autocrine/paracrine func-tions, that is capable of stimulating both myoblast proliferation and differentiation through the activation of diverse intracellular signalling pathways (Florini et al. 1996). It has been previously demonstrated that the induction of myogenesis is associated with the activation of the phosphatidylinositide 3¢OH-kinase/Akt pathway and repression of the MAPK signalling that leads to increased transcription of skeletal muscle-specific regulatory factors such as myogenin (Jiang et al. 1999;Xu and Wu 2000;Tiffin et al. 2004). Therefore, we tested whether the DL-thiorphan-induced inhibition of myoblast differentiation was associated with abnormalities in the activation state of Akt and ERK1/2 (44/ 42 MAPK, a downstream member of the MAPK signalling system). In control muscle cultures the experimental induction of differentiation was associated with increasing At the same time-point in cultures exposed to 10 )5 M DL-thiorphan, myotubes appear to be less numerous and shorter compared with control. Scale bar, 20 lm. (c) DL-thiorphan inhibits myoblast differentiation in a dose-dependent manner. Reduced myosin expression can be visible with concentrations of DL-thiorphan up to 10 )5 M, although the progressive reduction of DL-thiorphan in DM results in a trend towards a higher level of myosin expression at the end of the time-course. Concentrations of DL-thiorphan of 10 )6 M and higher have no effect on myoblast differentiation. The b-actin bands confirm an equal loading of all samples. Data shown are representative of all culture sets studied. (d) Graphical representation of the myosin level of expression, assessed at day 5, in differentiating muscle cultures treated with different concentrations of DL-thiorphan compared with untreated control cultures. Reduced myosin expression was statistically significant with all concentrations of DL-thiorphan used (10 )5 )10 )3 M). *p < 0.05 for myosin level of expression in phosphorylation of Akt from day 3 onwards (Fig. 5a) along with a rapid dephosphorylation of ERK1/2. On the contrary, in cultures treated with different concentrations of DL- thiorphan ( 10)5 )10 )3 M) the abnormal myoblast differentiation was associated with reduced levels of phosphorylated Akt. The effect of DL-thiorphan on Akt phosphorylation was dose-dependent. In fact, only minimal reduction of phosphorylated Akt compared with control cultures was evident when DL-thiorphan was used at a concentration of 10 )5 M, whereas a higher concentration (10 )3 M) resulted in marked inhibition of Akt phosphorylation as this signal became evident only by the end of the time-course on western blots (day 5, Fig. 5a).

An abnormal modulation of ERK1/2 was, for the most part, observed when DL-thiorphan was used at a concentration of 10 )3 M, mainly in the form of a persistent phosphorylation of the protein throughout the entire time-course (Fig. 5a). Lower concentrations of DL-thiorphan (10 )4 and 10 )5 M) did not result in visible changes of ERK1/ 2 phosphorylation compared with untreated control cultures after the experimental induction of differentiation (not shown). Using antibodies that recognize both phosphorylated and unphosphorylated forms of the proteins, no difference in the expression of total Akt and ERK1/2 was observed between treated and untreated muscle cultures (Fig. 5a). Taken together, this evidence suggests that exposure of muscle cells to DL-thiorphan results in an impairment of the IGF-I-mediated activation of the myogenic programme, possibly through the inhibition of NEP.

Impaired myogenesis in muscle cells exposed to DL-3- mercapto-2-benzylpropanoylglycine is associated with persistence of insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 5 in conditioned culture medium Modulation of the effects of IGF-I on muscle cells occurs through its interaction with IGFBPs, a family consisting of six structurally related polypeptides, whose expression and secretion by muscle cells are differentially modulated during myoblast proliferation and differentiation. Among these, IGFBP-3 and -5 appear to have a key role in myogenesis. Indeed, during myoblast differentiation in vitro IGFBP-3 expression is increased whereas IGFBP-5 is progressively degraded by proteolysis (James et al. 1996;Foulstone et al. 2003). The progressive reduction of intact IGFBP-5 in the extracellular space possibly results in an increased level of free and metabolically active IGF-I, thus favouring its effect on the progression of myogenesis. Accordingly, constitutively higher levels of IGFBP-5 inhibit myogenesis in a murine muscle cell line (James et al. 1996). As, in our cell system, the inhibition of myogenesis induced by exposure to DL-thiorphan was associated with a reduction of Akt phosphorylation, we further investigated whether this effect was mediated by an abnormal metabolism of IGFBP-3 and -5. By western blot, in control experiments IGFBP-3 protein rapidly increased in the conditioned culture medium after induction of differentiation (DM/vehicle), compared with the level detected in the medium of subconfluent myoblasts (GM). The IGFBP-3 level remained stable throughout the entire course of differentiation of myoblasts into myotubes. On the contrary, the IGFBP-5 level rapidly decreased with time in the course of myoblast differentiation and was virtually undetectable at the end of the assay. Cultures treated with DL-thiorphan showed a similar pattern of expression of IGFBP-3 in the conditioned culturing medium after shifting cells from GM to DM/thiorphan, whereas the level of expression of IGFBP-5 in the conditioned medium remained stable and was higher compared with control experiments (Fig. 5b). In our experimental conditions, IGFBP-3 and -5 were undetectable in unconditioned GM and DM (not shown), thus confirming that both proteins analysed in this assay were produced by cultured muscle cells.

Discussion

In the present study we have shown that NEP participates in the initial stages of the regeneration/differentiation process in skeletal muscle in vivo. This is suggested by morphological analysis of muscle biopsies showing that NEP protein is increased predominantly in small regenerating muscle fibres.

The results of our studies on primary human muscle cultures seem to validate this hypothesis. In vitro, the experimental induction of differentiation of myoblasts into myotubes recapitulates the biochemical and morphological changes underlying the development/regeneration process of muscle fibres in vivo. Upon induction of differentiation, NEP protein expression showed a monophasic course with a rapid increase followed by a gradual reduction coincident with the appearance of myosin, a marker of myotube formation. This is consistent with the immunocytochemical evidence that NEP protein was increased in forming myotubes and not in mature myotubes at the end of the differentiation process. Interestingly, NEP immunoreactivity was also detected in the nuclei of myoblasts and myotubes in vitro and in a variable amount of myonuclei of muscle fibres in vivo. To date, there is no evidence of a nuclear localization of NEP in the different tissues studied although a subcellular analysis of NEP expression has never been performed in skeletal muscle. However, it has been shown that the N-terminal portion of the protein contains a predicted nuclear localization sequence whose function is possibly masked by other structural elements present in the C-terminal portion (Gomes et al. 2003). The functional significance of NEP expression within the nuclei of muscle fibres is not known and further studies are necessary to clarify this issue.

In the course of human myogenesis in vitro, up-regulation of NEP protein probably occurs at the post-transcriptional level as NEP mRNA expression was unchanged during the entire time-course of differentiation. Inhibition of protein synthesis by cycloheximide suggests that the activation of differentiation is associated with an increased stability of NEP peptide in post-mitotic myoblasts. Stabilization of proteins is one of the cellular mechanisms through which muscle cells exiting the cell cycle regulate the expression of key myogenic factors, as previously demonstrated also for MyoD and Myf-5 (Lindon et al. 1998;Kitzmann et al. 1999). The molecular mechanism underlying the increased NEP stability in our cell systems is not known. The NEP structure is characterized by the presence of several Nglycosylation sites (Devault et al. 1987) and previous studies have shown that changes in the sugar moieties of the protein affect its stability and enzymatic activity (Lafrance et al. 1994). However, we did not observe any significant change of NEP molecular weight that could possibly reflect a modification of the glycosylation level of the protein after shifting the cells from GM to DM. In addition, our ongoing experiments, using N-glycosidase F and endoglycosidase H on total cellular extracts, have so far failed to detect any significant diversity in response to different glycosidase digestions between NEP expressed by growing and differentiating myoblasts, respectively (our unpublished observations). Although at present we cannot exclude more subtle glycosylation changes, it appears that such a mechanism is unlikely to be responsible for the increased stability of the protein observed.

Neprilysin is not the first metalloprotease shown to play a role in myogenesis. For example, the expression of ADAM12, a member of the M12 family of metallopeptidases, is transiently increased during skeletal muscle differentiation in vitro and in regenerating muscle fibres in vivo, possibly promoting, in association with other molecular partners, the fusion of myoblast into myotubes (Yagami-Hiromasa et al. 1995;Galliano et al. 2000;Lafuste et al. 2005). In addition, specific forms of matrix metalloproteases play a role in muscle cell migration and extracellular matrix remodelling during skeletal muscle development and regeneration (Carmeli et al. 2004).

Among the members of the M13 family of zinc-metalloprotease, DL-thiorphan has been shown in previous studies to potently inhibit NEP and the damage-induced neuronal endopeptidase (Roques et al. 1980;Russell et al. 1996;Iwata et al. 2000;Kiryu-Seo et al. 2000;Shirotani et al. 2001;Turner et al. 2001;Marr et al. 2004). As damageinduced neuronal endopeptidase is not expressed in either normal skeletal muscle (Kiryu-Seo et al. 2000) or in cultured myoblasts and myotubes (our unpublished observations), it is possible that in our cell system DL-thiorphan mainly interferes with NEP activity. Exposure to DL-thiorphan was associated with a dose-dependent failure of muscle cells to up-regulate NEP protein level upon induction of differentiation, compared with untreated control cultures. This resulted in a delay of myoblast fusion into myotubes without affecting their viability and cell cycle progression. We cannot exclude the possibility that DL-thiorphan may also have other, as yet unknown, cellular targets that are also involved in myogenesis and we are also aware of the fact that a higher concentration of DL-thiorphan, such as 10 )3 M, may result in a less specific action of this compound. A range of concentrations of DL-thiorphan, similar to that used in our experimental setting (10 )5 )10 )3 M), has been shown to be specific for NEP inhibition on crude cellular extracts and cell cultures in previous studies (Laporte et al. 1996;Kiryu-Seo et al. 2000;Kanemitsu et al. 2003;Iwata et al. 2004). However, in our study a concentration of DL-thiorphan of 10 )5 M still resulted in a less pronounced up-regulation of NEP and a delayed myogenesis with a reduction of the level of myosin expression corresponding to 55 ± 6% of the control value at the end of the assay. In addition, it has to be pointed out that in previous studies the use of a synthetic dipeptide that specifically inhibits the 3.4.24.11 peptidase (corresponding to NEP in accordance with the Nomenclature Committee of the International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology recommendations, http://www.chem. qmul.ac.uk/iubmb/nomenclature) also results in block of myoblast fusion (Couch andStrittmatter 1983, 1984). Taken together, this evidence confirms that NEP does indeed play a role in the progression of the myogenic programme once myoblasts exit the cell cycle.

We further investigated whether the abnormalities observed after exposure to DL-thiorphan were associated with an impairment of intracellular signalling pathways known to be intrinsically connected with myogenesis. Skeletal muscle differentiation is a highly regulated process that requires a timely modulation of cell signals resulting in the expression of muscle-specific regulatory factors and eventually of musclespecific proteins. IGF-I represents a central player of skeletal muscle physiology as it is able to stimulate both myoblast proliferation and differentiation through the separate control of two mutually exclusive cellular signalling systems, namely the phosphatidylinositide 3¢OH-kinase/Akt and MAPKs pathways, respectively. Indeed, it has been shown that in culture the IGF-I-induced myogenesis is associated with down-regulation of Ras-Raf signalling, leading to dephosphorylation of ERK1/2, followed by the activation of the phosphatidylinositide 3¢OH-kinase/Akt pathway (Coolican et al. 1997;Musaro and Rosenthal 1999;Adams 2002;Tiffin et al. 2004). Accordingly, in control experiments we observed a progressive increase of Akt phosphorylation associated with a rapid reduction of the ERK1/2 phosphorylation level after the induction of myoblast differentiation. In contrast, exposure to DL-thiorphan resulted in a dose-dependent reduction of Akt phosphorylation. These findings suggest that exposure of muscle cells to DL-thiorphan results in an impairment of the IGF-I-regulated signalling pathways that are connected with the maturation of the myogenic programme, possibly through the inhibition of NEP.

The muscle cell response to IGF-I is modulated by a family of six serum binding proteins, the IGFBPs, that are differently expressed during proliferation and differentiation (Florini et al. 1996). Proliferation of myoblasts is mainly associated with secretion of IGFBP-4, whereas IGFBP-3 and -5 appear to play a role in myogenic differentiation (Florini et al. 1996;Foulstone et al. 2003). In vitro, IGFBP-3 is up-regulated during the experimental fusion of myoblasts into myotubes, whereas intact IGFBP-5 can be detected in the culturing medium in the early phase of muscle cell differentiation but it is then progressively degraded by an unknown protease in the more advanced stages (Foulstone et al. 2003). Furthermore, C2 myoblasts overexpressing IGFBP-5 fail to differentiate in conditions of low serum medium while low levels of IGFBP-5 result in accelerated differentiation (James et al. 1996). In our cell system, the delayed differentiation following treatment with DL-thiorphan was associated with persisting high levels of IGFBP-5. In view of these observations it is possible that the abnormal differentiation observed in muscle cultures exposed to DL-thiorphan is, at least in part, the consequence of an abnormal metabolism of IGFBP-5. Increased IGFBP-5 in our cell system would compete more effectively with IGFBP-3 for complexing with IGF-I, as previously suggested (Baxter et al. 2002;Salih et al. 2004). Both serine proteases and metalloproteases have been shown to be able to degrade IGFBP-5. In fibroblasts serine protease activity predominates over that of metallopeptidases in degrading IGFBP-5, whereas during osteoblast differentiation metalloproteases contribute more significantly to IGFBP-5 proteolysis (Thrailkill et al. 1995;Nam et al. 1996).To date, it is not known which peptidase is specific to IGFBP-5 in muscle cells. Our results raise the possibility that NEP may be involved, either directly or indirectly, in the regulation of the IGFBP-5 level in the extracellular matrix upon induction of myogenic differentiation. We therefore hypothesize that, during muscle differentiation/regeneration, up-regulation of NEP protein would promote the progressive cleavage of IGFBP-5. This could result in a higher level of free and metabolically active IGF-I that is therefore available for interaction with other molecular partners, such as IGFBP-3, involved in the myogenic process. Conversely, NEP inhibition results in sequestration of IGF-I by intact IGFBP-5 and therefore in delayed IGF-I-mediated myogenesis. The fact that myoblasts exposed to DL-thiorphan also remain viable in conditions of low serum medium, as seen in our cell system, could possibly be related to the slow release of IGF-I from this 'storage pool' that promotes cell survival, as previously suggested (James et al. 1996). We cannot exclude that NEP also participates in the regulation of other cell signalling systems that are crucial during skeletal muscle differentiation. Previous studies have shown that NEP knockout mice do not present with gross developmental abnormalities (Lu et al. 1995), although no detailed analysis of skeletal muscle has been reported to date. To further investigate the role of NEP during myogenesis, it would be interesting to verify whether in this animal model skeletal muscle is characterized by more subtle abnormalities or shows an impaired regeneration process following experimental injury.

In diagnostic muscle biopsies NEP protein accumulation was also found in abnormal non-regenerating muscle fibres of IBM. Increased NEP may be instrumental in reducing the burden of Ab from IBM muscle, similarly to what has been suggested in the Alzheimer's disease brain (Iwata et al. 2000(Iwata et al. , 2001;;Akiyama et al. 2001;Yasojima et al. 2001;Leissring et al. 2003;Shiiki et al. 2004). Moreover, we have previously shown an up-regulation of IGF-I and members of the phosphatidylinositide 3¢OH-kinase/Akt metabolic pathway in IBM muscle, possibly as a result of the activation of an autocrine signalling that promotes the survival of muscle fibres (Broccolini et al. 2004). We can therefore speculate that NEP may also play a role in this scenario by counteracting a putative increased expression of IGFBPs, such as IGFBP-5, that is possibly favoured by the local release of inflammatory cytokines (Heemskerk et al. 1999) and results in reduced levels of free and metabolically active IGF-I. It is worth noting that in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, a disorder characterized by the progressive degeneration of ventral horn motor neurones, a possible derangement of the IGF-I signalling has been associated with increased levels of IGFBP-2, -5 and -6 (Wilczak et al. 2003). This suggests that an impaired function of specific cellular proteases, probably due to mechanisms of ageing and increased oxidative stress, may be responsible for the activation of the pathogenic cascade in this disorder and it is possible that a similar abnormal mechanism is also present in IBM muscle.

Interestingly, to date numerous proteins including Ab precursor protein, IGF-I, apoE and prion protein, shown to be increased in the course of muscle fibre regeneration, have also been found aberrantly accumulated in non-regenerating abnormal fibres of IBM muscle (Sarkozi et al. 1994a(Sarkozi et al. , 1994b;;Mirabella et al. 1996b;Broccolini et al. 2000;Askanas and Engel 2002). It is not known whether this aspect represents a general dysregulation in the expression of different genes, specifically connected with the peculiar pathogenic mechanism of IBM, or reflects a genuine attempt to repair/regenerate vulnerable fibres. Our finding of increased NEP in abnormal IBM muscle fibres further strengthens the evidence of activation of multiple metabolic pathways normally involved in muscle development. However, the reason why in IBM, despite the activation of potentially repairing mechanisms, muscle degeneration steadily progresses is not known. Therefore, a better elucidation of the function of molecules possibly involved in muscle development, such as NEP, may be relevant in understanding the defective regenerative properties of IBM muscle. This will probably give clues in the attempt to define new and more effective therapeutic strategies for IBM as well as for other neuromuscular disorders.

Acknowledgements

This study was supported by grants from The Italian Ministry of Health 2003 to MM and from Fondo per gli Investimenti della Ricerce di Base 2001 and Ministero dell'Istruzione dell'Universita e della Ricerca 2003 to PAT.

Fig. 11Fig. 1 (a) Double staining showing neprilysin (NEP) expression by immunohistochemistry (FITC) and nuclear labelling by Hoechst, respectively. In all muscle biopsies NEP was detected along the cytoplasmic membrane of fibres and also in a variable amount of myonuclei. Arrows indicate myonuclei immunopositive for NEP, whereas open arrowheads indicate myonuclei lacking NEP immunoreactivity. Scale bar, 20 lm. (b) Double fluorescence immunohistochemistry for NEP (FITC) and myosin heavy chain developmental type (MHCd) [Texas red (TR)] on polymyositis (PM, upper panel) and inclusion body myositis (IBM, lower panel). In PM a small regenerating muscle fibre shows an intense cytoplasmic immunoreactivity for NEP (open arrowhead), whereas in a larger regenerating muscle fibre NEP immunoreactivity is limited to the plasma membrane (solid arrowhead), similar to that observed in adjacent non-regenerating muscle fibres. In IBM muscle increased NEP immunoreactivity involves MHCd-positive regenerating muscle fibres (open arrowhead) and abnormal vacuolated muscle fibres (identified by lack of immunoreactivity for MHCd, arrow). Scale bar, 20 lm. (c) The open arrowhead indicates, in an IBM muscle, a regenerating fibre immunopositive for MHCd that, on an adjacent section, stains positive for NEP (FITC). The arrows indicate an abnormal IBM muscle fibre showing increased immunoreactivity for NEP (FITC) and accumulation of typical amyloidb-immunoreactive cytoplasmic inclusions (TR). On an adjacent section the same fibre shows lack of immunoreactivity for MHCd, thus confirming that this fibre is not regenerating. Scale bar, 10 lm. (d) Western blot analysis on muscle homogenates. In all myopathies the level of expression of NEP correlates with that of neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM), a definite marker of regeneration in skeletal muscle. The muscle-specific actin bands confirm an equal loading of all samples. Data shown are representative of all muscle biopsies studied. DMD, Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

Fig. 22Fig. 2 (a) Western blot analysis of neprilysin (NEP) and myosin expression during myoblast differentiation in vitro. After induction of differentiation NEP expression rapidly increases during days 1 and 2 and gradually declines thereafter coincident with the appearance of myosin. The b-actin bands confirm an equal loading of all samples. (b) Graphical representation of the averaged values of NEP protein expression during the 5-day time-course of myoblast differentiation. NEP t0 indicates the level of NEP in myoblasts before induction of differentiation. Increased NEP expression was statistically significant at days 2 and 3. *p < 0.05 by Tukey-Kramer test for NEP level of

(an antibiotic known to inhibit protein synthesis in eukaryotic cells) in GM or DM. Control experiments were represented by cultures of subconfluent myoblasts maintained in GM or DM with the addition of the same volume of vehicle (DMSO) without cycloheximide (GM/DMSO and DM/ DMSO, respectively). The level of NEP protein expression in subconfluent mononucleated myoblasts kept in GM was set as the baseline.

Fig. 33Fig.3(a) Northern blot analysis of neprilysin (NEP) mRNA on total RNA samples extracted from normal muscle cultures at different timepoints during myogenic differentiation. No change of NEP mRNA expression is observed throughout the 5-day time-course. The mRNA signal of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) confirms the equal loading of all samples. Data shown are representative of all culture sets studied. (b) NEP protein stability increases upon induction of myogenic differentiation. NEP expression is analysed in myoblasts exposed to 35 mM cycloheximide in growth (GM) or differentiation (DM) medium. In muscle cells kept in GM/cycloheximide for 2 days, NEP level is reduced by 40% at the end-point of the analysis. On the contrary, the NEP protein level remains stable in myoblasts exposed to DM/cycloheximide over the entire time-course of the assay. NEP t0 indicates the level of NEP before exposing cells to cycloheximide either in GM or DM.

Fig. 44Fig.4(a) Exposure to DL-3-mercapto-2-benzylpropanoylglycine (DL-thiorphan) (thior) during differentiation results in neprilysin (NEP) inhibition and abnormal myoblast differentiation, as shown by the markedly lower level of myosin expression at the end of the assay (day 5) in treated compared with untreated muscle cultures. The bactin bands confirm an equal loading of all samples. (b) Phase contrast photography of muscle cultures during the experimental induction of differentiation showing morphological differences between cultures exposed to different concentrations of DL-thiorphan [differentiation medium (DM)/thior 10 -n M] and untreated controls (DM/vehicle). By day 3 numerous myotubes are already present in control muscle cultures. At the same time-point, no myotubes are detectable in cultures treated with 10 )3 M DL-thiorphan and only sparse myotubes are present in cultures treated with 10 )5 M thiorphan. At the end of the assay (day 5), the myogenic differentiation is virtually completed in control cultures, as suggested by the presence of numerous and densely packed myotubes. Conversely, only sparse myotubes can be seen in cultures treated with 10 )3 M DL-thiorphan.

Fig. 55Fig.5(a) In control muscle cultures, myoblast differentiation is associated with increasing phosphorylation of Akt [phospho-Akt Ser473 (p-Akt Ser473 )] starting from day 3 along with rapid dephosphorylation of ERK1/2 [phospho-ERK1/2 (p-ERK1/2)]. On the contrary, in cultures treated with different concentrations of DL-3-mercapto-2-ben- zylpropanoylglycine (DL-thiorphan) (10 )5 )10 )3 M) the abnormal myoblast differentiation was associated with a dose-dependent reduction of phosphorylated Akt. An abnormal modulation of ERK1/2 was for the most part observed when DL-thiorphan was used at a concentration of 10 )3 M, mainly in the form of a persistent phosphorylation of the protein throughout the time-course. Lower concentrations of DL-thiorphan (10 )4 and 10 )5 M) did not result in visible changes of ERK1/2 phosphorylation compared with untreated control cultures after the experimental induction of differentiation (not shown). The levels of total ERK1/2 and Akt do not change during

, 2006, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1471-4159.2005.03584.x by University Of Illinois At Urbana Champaign, Wiley Online Library on [07/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons Licenseexpression at days 2 and 3 vs. the baseline level, respectively; n ¼ 5.(c) Double fluorescence immunocytochemistry on normal primarymuscle cultures after induction of differentiation. Increased NEP(FITC) signal is evident in a newly formed myotube at day 1 (char-acterized by a reduced desmin immunoreactivity, upper panel) com-differentiation. NEP t0 indicates the level of NEP in myoblasts before induction of differentiation. Increased NEP expression was statistically significant at days 2 and 3. *p < 0.05 by Tukey-Kramer test for NEP level of pared with that of adjacent myoblasts [identified by a stronger desmin immunoreactivity, Texas red (TR)]. At day 5 (lower panel), a mature myotube, identified by strong myosin immunoreactivity (TR), shows a low level of NEP expression (FITC). Scale bar, 10 lm. DM, differentiation medium. NEP expression in muscle regeneration and IBM 781 Ó 2005 International Society for Neurochemistry, J. Neurochem. (2006) 96, 777-789 14714159

, 2006, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1471-4159.2005.03584.x by University Of Illinois At Urbana Champaign, Wiley Online Library on [07/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons LicenseDL-thiorphan-treated cultures vs. control cultures, n ¼ 5 for each experimental group. NEP expression in muscle regeneration and IBM 783 Ó 2005 International Society for Neurochemistry, J. Neurochem. (2006) 96, 777-789 14714159

