Inflammatory, immune, and viral aspects of inclusion-body myositis

Muscle biopsies from patients with sporadic inclusion-body myositis (sIBM) consistently demonstrate that the inflammatory T cells almost invariably invade intact (not vacuolated) fibers, whereas the vacuolated fibers are rarely invaded by T cells. This indicates two concurrently ongoing processes, an autoimmune mediated by cytotoxic T cells and a degenerative manifested by the vacuolated muscle fibers and deposits of amyloid-related proteins. The autoimmune features of IBM are highlighted by the strong association of the disease with: a) HLA I, II antigens, in frequency identical to classic autoimmune diseases; b) other autoimmune disorders in up to 32% of the patients, autoantibodies, paraproteinemias, or immunodeficiency; c) HIV and HTLV-I infection with increasingly recognized frequency (up to 13 known cases); and d) antigen-specific, cytotoxic, and clonally expanded CD8ϩ autoinvasive T cells with rearranged T-cell receptor genes that persist over time, even in different muscles, and invade muscle fibers expressing MHC-I antigen and costimulatory molecules. In contrast to IBM, in various dystrophies the inflammatory cells are clonally diverse and the muscle fibers do not express MHC-I or costimulatory molecules in the pattern seen in IBM. Like other chronic autoimmune conditions with coexisting inflammatory and degenerative features (i.e., primary progressive MS), IBM is resistant to conventional immunotherapies. Recent data suggest that strong anti-T cell therapies can be promising and they are the focus of ongoing research.

Immunogenetics and association with other autoimmune disorders. Based on a series of 99 consecutive patients with sIBM (table), 6 it was found that in at least 20% of them the disease was associated with systemic autoimmune or connective tissue disorders. An increased frequency of DR␤ 1 0301 and DQ␤ 1 0201 alleles associated with DR and DQ haplotypes was also documented in up to 75% of the patients. 7 In a recent series of 52 IBM patients, 33% of them had other autoimmune disorders, such as MS, autoimmune thyroid disease, rheumatoid arthritis, or Sjo ¨grens syndrome. 8 Interestingly, the frequency of the associated autoimmune disorders in this series was the same as the one noted for Lampert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome, 8 a classic autoimmune disorder. Further, the B 8 -DR 3 -DR 52 -DQ2 haplotype was found in 67% of the patients, regardless if they had another autoimmune disease, in frequency identical to that seen in other autoimmune disorders such as myasthenia gravis or myasthenic syndrome. 8 The HLA-A haplotype was also associated with earlier disease onset, suggesting that immunoregulatory genes are inherently connected with the manifestation of the symptoms.

The classic clinical and histologic phenotype (with prominent endomysial inflammation) of sIBM has been seen in other family members of the same generation. 9 This association, which we have called "fa-milial inflammatory IBM," 9 is analogous to the familiar occurrence of other autoimmune disorders such as myasthenia gravis, rheumatoid arthritis, or lupus, in several family members.

Association with dysproteinemia, paraproteinemia, and immunodeficiency. A benign immunoglobulin (Ig) G, IgM, or IgA monoclonal gammopathy has been observed in 16   10 The monoclonal IgG extracted from the serum of IBM patients more often than the controls recognized various muscle proteins of 35-145 kd, indicating disturbed immunoregulation. Apart from the high frequency of IBM with dysproteinemia and paraproteinemia, the disease has been also seen in patients with agammaglobulinemia and common variable immunodeficiency. 11,12 The patients with IBM and immunodeficiency are younger by at least 15 years and respond to intravenous Ig (IVIG) or steroids for a period of time. 11,12 In our two reported cases, a high number of natural killer (NK) cells invading ICAM-1-positive muscle fibers was observed among the endomysial infiltrates. It was demonstrated that in these patients the lymphocyte-induced cytotoxicity was of two types, one mediated by CD8ϩ cytotoxic T cells invading MHC-I-expressing muscle fibers and the other mediated by NK-cells invading MHC-I-negative but ICAM-positive fibers. 11 Association with retroviral infections (HIV, HTLV-1). Although several viruses, including Coxsackieviruses, influenza, paramyxoviruses, cytomegalovirus (CMV), and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) have been indirectly associated with IBM, sensitive methodologies have not proven any connection with these viruses. 13 However, IBM has been seen with rather unusual frequency in humans infected with HIV and HTLV-1 infection 14,15 This association is more than a coincidence because in retroviral-positive patients the disease always appears before the age of 50, but several years after the first manifestations of the retroviral infection. [13][14][15] At least seven HIV/HTLV-1 positive patients with IBM have been reported [13][14][15] and we are aware of six more cases during the last 4 years (Dalakas MC, unpublished observations), suggesting that the disease is now more frequently recognized in HIV-positive patients who live longer and harbor the virus for several years. The clinical phenotype and muscle histology in HIV-IBM patients are identical to the retroviral-negative IBM. The predominant endomysial cells are CD 8 ϩ, cytotoxic T cells which along with macrophages, invade or surround MHC-I-antigen-expressing nonnecrotic muscle fibers. Using in situ hybridization, polymerase chain reaction, immunocytochemistry, and electronmicroscopy, viral antigens could not be detected within the muscle fibers but only in occasional endomysial macrophages. 13,14 We have interpreted these observations   2. Sporadic IBM can occur in family members of the same generation (familial inflammatory IBM), 9 as seen with other autoimmune disorders 3. Association with other autoimmune disorders and autoantibodies in frequency analogous to the one seen in other autoimmune disorders (i.e., MG, LEMS) 6,8 4. Increased association with paraproteinemia (22.8%) in frequency significantly higher than age-matched controls (2%) 10 5. Association with common variable immunodeficiency and natural killer cells 11,12 6. Association with HIV and HTLV-1 infection, with increasingly recognized frequency (up to 13 cases reported) [13][14][15][16][17] 7. The CD8ϩ autoinvasive T cells: a) Surround MHC-I expressing fibers (MHC-I/CD8ϩ lesion) 18 b) Express perforin and activation markers of cytotoxicity; 22 c) Are clonally expanded with restricted aminoacid sequences in the CDR3 region of the T cell receptors (TCR); [23][24][25][26] and d) TCR families persist over time even in different muscles 25,26 8. There is ubiquitous upregulation of MHC-I antigen and the costimulatory molecules BB1, ICOS-L and CD40 on muscle fibers, even on those not invaded by T cells, while the counterreceptors CD28, CTLA-4, ICOS and CD40L are overexpressed on the autoinvasive T cells 16,17,19,[27][28][29][30] 9. There is strong upregulation of cytokines, chemokines and their receptors at the protein, mRNA, and gene levels [31][32][33][34][35][36] to suggest that in HIV and HTLV-1 IBM there is no evidence of persistent infection of the muscle fibers with the virus or viral replication within the muscle.

The HIV/HTLV-1 IBM is caused by a clonally-driven subpopulation of activated T cells that invade MHC-I-expressing muscle fibers in a pattern identical to the cytotoxic process seen in retroviral-negative IBM, as described below. In the retroviral-positive patients, the retroviral-positive endomysial macrophages may facilitate the autoimmune process by secreting cytokines, chemokines or NO which upregulate MHC-I or costimulatory molecules and enhance myocytotoxicity. Molecular immunologic studies using tetramers have now shown that retrovirally-specific cytotoxic T cells are recruited within the muscle fibers and that the CDR3 region of the T-cell receptor contains amino acid residues for specific HLA/viral peptide interaction. 16,17 These findings suggest that the chronic retroviral infection along with immune recognition are sufficient to trigger the inflammatory process that leads to sIBM. 18

Sensitized autoinvasive cytotoxic CD8؉ T cells:

an immunologic synapse formation with the MHC-I-expressing muscle fibers. In sIBM, the CD8ϩ cells surround healthy, but MHC-I-class expressing, nonnecrotic muscle fibers that eventually invade. 18 Muscle fibers normally do not express detectable amount of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I or II antigens. In IBM, however, widespread overexpression of MHC is an early event that can be seen even in areas remote from the inflammation. [18][19][20] In IBM, the T-cells are activated, as evidenced by their expression of ICAM-I, MHC-I, and ICOS on their surface 5 ; further, the ICOSpositive autoinvasive CD8ϩ T cells are cytotoxic overexpressing perforin granules at the protein and mRNA level; these granules upon release induce muscle fiber necrosis 21 (figure 2). In other chronic myopathies or dystrophies, and in contrast to sIBM, the muscle fibers do not express the MHC-I antigen in a ubiquitous and consistent pattern, 5 or the costimulatory molecules described below. Furthermore in dystrophies, the occasionally seen autoinvasive T cells are not antigen-driven because they are clonally diverse, do not form the immunologic synapse described below, and do not express the specific activation markers of cytotoxicity.

In sIBM, the MHC-I-expressing muscle fibers form an immunologic synapse with the autoinvasive CD8 T cells, as supported by rearrangement of the TCR genes, expression of costimulatory molecules, and upregulation of cytokines, described below.

Rearrangement of the TCR gene of the endomysial T cells. The T cells recognize an antigen via the T cell receptors (TCR), a heterodimer of two ␣

and ␤ chains, encoded by multiple gene families in the V (variable), D (diversity), J (joining), and C (constant) regions of the TCR. The part of the TCR that recognizes an antigen is the CDR3 region, which is encoded by genes in the V-J and V-D-J segments of the TCR gene. If the endomysial T cells are selectively recruited by a specific autoantigen, the use of the V and J genes of the TCR should be restricted and the amino acid sequence in their CDR3 region should be conserved. 22 In patients with IBM, but not in those with DM or dystrophies, only certain T cells

Figure 2. Molecules, receptors and their ligands involved in the transgression of T cells through the endothelial cell wall and recognition of antigens on muscle fibers of patients with sIBM. LFA I/ICAM-I binding and TCR scanning for antigen initiates the formation of an immunologic synapse between MHC-I and TCR. Stimulation is supported and enhanced by the engagement of costimulatory molecules BB1, ICOS and CD40 on the muscle fibers and their ligands CD28, CTLA-4, ICOS-L and CD40L on the autoinvasive T cells. Metalloproteinases facilitate the migration of T cells and their attachment to the muscle surface. Muscle fiber necrosis occurs via the perforin granules released by the autoaggressive T cells. A direct myocytotoxic effect exerted by the released IFN-␥, IL1

, or TNF␣ may also play a role. Death of the muscle fiber is mediated by a form of necrosis rather than apoptosis, presumably because of the counterbalancing effect or protection by the antiapoptotic molecules such as Bcl-2, hILP, and FLIP, which are upregulated in PM and IBM muscles. 20 Fas is also expressed, but it does not mediate apoptosis in the muscle. 3,20 of specific TCR␣ and TCR␤ families are recruited to the muscle from the circulation. 23,24 Cloning and sequencing of the amplified endomysial or autoinvasive TCR gene families has demonstrated a restricted use of the J␤ gene with conserved aminoacid sequence in the CDR3 region, indicating that these cells are specifically selected and clonally expanded in situ. Immunocytochemistry combined with PCR and sequencing of the most prominent TCR families has shown that the autoinvasive, but not the perivascular, CD8ϩ endomysial cells are the clonally expanded cells. 23,24 Sequential muscle biopsy specimens obtained during a 19-to 22-month period in three patients with IBM has further shown a persistent clonal restriction of the same V␤ families among the autoinvasive CD8ϩ cells. 25 The most frequently detected gene families among the autoinvasive CD8ϩ T cells were the V␤3, V␤5.1, V␤6.7, and V␤13. These cells did not only exhibit restricted usage of certain V␤ gene families but also had a conserved amino-acid sequence homology in the complementary CDR3 determining region. 25 Of interest, in the CDR3 region only a small number of amino acids were found, suggesting that the MHC-I-expressing muscle fibers present limited number of antigenic peptides to the autoinvasive CD8ϩ T cells during the course of the disease. The observation that in sIBM identical T cell clones with restricted amino acid sequence in the CDR3 region belong to autoinvasive T cells and persist for several years even in different muscles, has been confirmed in several studies. [23][24][25][26] Collectively, in sIBM there is overwhelming evidence of clonal restriction of the autoinvasive endomysial T cells which are specifically recruited to the muscle and appear to expand in situ probably driven by the same antigen(s).

Presence of costimulatory molecules. For the activation of T cells and antigen recognition, the presence of costimulatory molecules and their counterreceptors is fundamental. The clonally expanded autoinvasive CD8ϩ T cells mentioned earlier, are primed to receive specific antigenic peptides presented by the MHC-I molecule expressed on the muscle fibers. For antigen presentation, however, these MHC-I-positive fibers should also express the B7 family of costimulatory molecules (B7-1, B7-2, BB1, or ICOS-L), whereas the autoinvasive CD8ϩ T cells express the counterreceptors CD28 and CTLA-4, or ICOS. Several studies have now confirmed that in sIBM muscles, the BB1 (CD80) is expressed on MHC-I-positive muscle fibers which make cell-to-cell contact with the CD28 or CTLA-4 ligands on the autoinvasive CD8ϩ T cells [27][28][29][30] (figure 2). Further, the BB1, which is induced by interferon-␥ on human myoblasts, is a functional molecule playing a role in antigen presentation and T cell differentiation. 27 The concept of the immunologic synapse between CD8ϩ cells and muscle fibers was expanded further with finding ICOS-L (inducible-costimulator-ligand), an-other B7-family molecule associated with memory T cells. 29 In IBM, muscle fibers express ICOS-L while their autoinvasive T cells express ICOS, 30 reinforcing the view that muscle fibers can behave as antigenpresenting cells (APC). Further, the ICOS-positive T cells are cytotoxic expressing perforin granules. 30 Because ICOS-L is a functional molecule upregulated by TNF␣, 29 in sIBM the ICOS-ICOS-L interactions are fundamental in facilitating clonal expansion and costimulation of the effector functions of memory T cells.

Upregulation of cytokines, cytokine signaling, chemokines, and metalloproteinases. Cytokines and chemokines are the third important component in the immunologic synapse because they are essential in enhancing the activation of T cells and the induction of costimulatory molecules. PCR studies of muscle tissue have confirmed a varying degree of amplification of messenger RNA of the various cytokines including interleukin IL-1, IL-2, tumor necrosis factor ␣, interferon gamma, transforming growth factor ␤ (TGF-␤), granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, IL-6 and IL-10. 22,31,32 Some of these cytokines can also exert a direct cytotoxic effect on the muscle fibers in vivo and on human myotubes in vitro.

Chemokines, a class of small cytokines, are known participating molecules in the leukocyte recruitment and activation at the sites of inflammation. Among them, MCP-1 and MIP-1a are strongly upregulated in IBM muscles at the protein and mRNA level. 32 The interferon-␥-inducible chemokines Mig and IP-10, and the Mig's receptor CXCR3 are also strongly expressed on the muscle fibers and on a subset of autoinvasive CD8ϩ cells. 34 Because Mig and IP-10 are produced by myotubes upon INF-␥ stimulation, they could facilitate the recruitment of activated T cells to the muscle and contribute to self-sustaining nature of endomysial inflammation as commonly seen in sIBM. 34 The presence of MCP-I and MIP-1a in the extracellular matrix and the possibility of in situ synthesis may have an effect in promoting tissue fibrosis in the late stages IBM. Cytokines and chemokines activate also adhesion molecules such as VCAM, ICAM-1, VLA-4 and metalloproteinases (MMPs), a family of calcium-dependent zinc endopeptidases involved in the remodeling of the extracellular matrix, and facilitate the transmigration of lymphocytes toward the muscle fiber. Among MMPs, the MMP-9 and MMP-2 are upregulated on the non-necrotic and MHC-I class expressing muscle fibers of patients with IBM. 35 Further, MMP-2 immunostains the autoinvasive CD8ϩ T cells, which make cell-to-cell contact with muscle fibers, and immunoreacts with ␤-amyloid and ␤-APP deposits on the vacuolated fibers. 35 Of interest, using gene array studies, the upregulated chemokine and cytokine genes is much higher in the muscles of patients with IBM compared to muscles of patients with dermatomyositis. 36 Vacuolated fibers and amyloids in s-IBM: relation to inflammation. It is increasingly clear, as mentioned earlier, that in s-IBM the muscle fibers invaded by T cells are almost never vacuolated while the vacuolated fibers are not surrounded by T cells (figure 1), implying two parallel processes, one immunopathologic and another degenerative. Vacuoles are observed in several myopathies that lack inflammation, such as hereditary IBM due to GNE mutations, x-linked Emery-Dreifus muscular dystrophy, rigid-spine syndrome, other proximal and distal myopathies such as myofibrillar myopathies or dysferlinopathies, and even in chronic neurogenic conditions such as postpolio. [37][38][39] The intracellular accumulation of amyloid-related proteins A␤PP, phosphorylated tau, presenilin-1, apolipoprotein-E, ␥-tubulin, clusterin, a-synuclein, gelsolin, oxidative stress proteins, and all the components of the catalytic core of the proteasomes have been recently found to be equally expressed in sIBM and myofibrillar myopathies [37][38][39][40][41] leading to the conclusion that these accumulations may not be unique to the vacuoles of s-IBM. [37][38][39][40][41] Although it remains unclear whether they are the primary or the secondary process in IBM, the accumulation of these proteins may be fundamental in understanding the ongoing stressor mechanisms that lead to muscle fiber degeneration, not only in IBM but also in the other myopathies where they also accumulate.

A fundamental issue in s-IBM may be the relationship between cytokines, amyloid, and chronic inflammation, an area also relevant in AD. In s-IBM, cytokines, such as IL-1␤ derived by macrophages and T cells, are in excess and co-localize with ␤-APP. 22 Because ␤-APP enhances IL-1␤ production and IL-1␤ upregulates ␤-APP and ␤-APP gene expression (IL1␤ ¢ ¡ ␤ -APP ¢ ¡ IL1␤ ¢ ¡ inflammation), an interaction between amyloid and inflammatory mediators has been proposed. 22 There appears to be a linear relationship between the mRNA of upregulated cytokines and chemokines with that of degenerating molecules ␤APP, Tau and ubiquitin suggesting a role of the proinflammatory markers in enhancing degeneration. 42 The immunogenicity of ␤-amyloid was recently studied in healthy elderly subjects and patients with AD compared to young/middle-age adults. 43 Strong A␤-reactive and HLA-restricted T cell responses against the immunogenic A␤1-42 peptide were found in the elderly, suggesting that A␤ is presented as an antigen by APCs in the context of MHC-TCR interaction. Whether in s-IBM A␤ can serve as antigen processed by the APC-functioning muscle fibers, leading to antigenspecific T-cell activation, remains unclear. Emerging data suggest that the continuous upregulation of MHC-I molecule in muscle fibers leads to endoplasmic reticulum stress response and intracellular accumulation of misfolded glycoproteins as well as nuclear factor K␤ pathways, which stimulate further the MHC-I-CO 8 complex, resulting in self-sustaining inflammatory response. 44 Reconciling the immunopathogenesis of IBM with the relative resistance to conventional immunotherapies. Despite the above described primary immune factors, sIBM remains resistant to most immunotherapies, justifying the contention by some that it could be more of a degenerative disease rather than autoimmune. However IBM is not the only immune disease unresponsive to such therapies. Primary progressive MS is a classic example where immune and degenerative features coexist and the disease is resistant to therapies. Although the common immunotherapeutic agents, such as corticosteroids, azathioprine, methotrexate, cyclosporine, and cyclophosphamide, are generally ineffective in patients with sIBM, some patients have responded to steroids for a period of time and some others to mycophenolate. 45,46 Up to 25% patients in a controlled study have also responded transiently to IVIg. 46 IVIg has also improved the dysphagia of IBM in both a controlled study and uncontrolled series [47][48][49] suggesting that more specific or potent agents may be more promising. Among these agents currently considered are the available monoclonal antibodies directed against T-cell regulatory pathways, such as CD56 (CAMPATH), costimulatory molecules (CD28/CTLA-4), adhesion molecules (integrins/LFA-1/ICAM), and cytokines (TNF␣), or those against B cells (CD20). 46 Toward this direction, the results based on a 12month, open, randomized trial in 11 IBM patients, using anti-T-lymphocyte globulin (ATG) combined with methotrexate, are of interest. 50 Increased strength by 1.4% was noted in six patients randomized to ATG and methotrexate; in contrast, five patients randomized to methotrexate alone lost 11.1% of their strength (p ϭ 0.021) during the study period. 50 The study is significant in suggesting that an aggressive anti-T cell agent may be beneficial, offering further justification for using other similar therapies. A relevant study using alemtuzumab (Campath), a T-cell depleting monoclonal antibody against CD52, is now in progress at the National Institutes of Health (M.C. Dalakas, Principal Investigator). Campath is even a stronger agent than ATG because it causes T-ell depletion for at least 6 months. It is anticipated that depletion of the T cells from the periphery will also result in T-cell depletion from the muscle. At the time of this writing, eight patients have completed the study. Other promising agents along these lines could be rapamycin, which acts via a calcineurin-independent pathway to prevent the translation of mRNA for key cytokines, and drugs such as natalizumab that block the transmigration of T cells across the endothelial cell wall. 46 

FigureFigure1. Cross-section of muscle from a sIBM patient. Note two red-rimmed vacuolated fibers (left and right upper corner) not invaded by inflammatory cells. If the same vacuolated fibers are followed at considerable length in longitudinal sections, they remain devoid of autoinvasive inflammatory T cells. In contrast, the fibers surrounded by T cells are not vacuolated, degenerating, or necrotic, but rather healthy-appearing fibers.

