Inclusion-body myositis and Alzheimer disease Two sides of the same coin, or different currencies altogether?

Inclusion-body myositis (IBM) is an age-related, slowly progressive degenerative disorder of the skeletal musculature with no effective treatment. Clinically, the disease is characterized by the atrophy of both proximal and distal muscle groups, leading to a gradually advancing weakness. 1 The muscle fibers from IBM patients display characteristic vacuolizations and contain heterogeneous, filamentous inclusions. 2 Although initially characterized as a form of polymyositis, the disease is only weakly responsive to corticosteroid treatment or other forms of immunomodulation and is now recognized as a distinct disease entity.

Aspects of IBM pathology share intriguing similarities to that of Alzheimer disease (AD), the most common form of elderly dementia. The severe cognitive dysfunction in AD is brought about by massive neurodegenerative changes to the brain. The bulk of available evidence implicates a small protein fragment, the amyloid-␤ peptide (A␤), as the major causative element in the neurodegenerative process. 3,4 In the AD brain, A␤ is deposited extracellularly as amyloid, and is the major proteinaceous component of the neuritic plaques that can be found throughout the cortex. For over a decade, it has been known that A␤-or larger protein fragments that contain italso accumulate as part of the characteristic intracellular lesions of IBM. 2,5,6 What is unknown is whether or not this is important for IBM pathogenesis.

Strong evidence for a role of the amyloid ␤-protein precursor (APP), APP fragments, A␤, or all three, in the pathogenesis of IBM comes from several sources. 6,7 The appearance of A␤-positive, noncongophilic deposits precedes vacuolization in IBM muscle fibers. 8 Further, APP mRNA is increased in the disease state, 9 suggesting that the over expression of the precursor protein may be sufficient to cause pa-thology. As expected, the in vitro over expression of APP in muscle cells leads to a range of degenerative changes resembling various facets of IBM pathology. 10 In transgenic mice, the overexpression of the CTF␤ fragment of APP 11,12 or, more recently, the full length APP molecule itself, 13 also leads to the manifestation of vacuolar changes, centric nuclei, lymphocytic infiltration, and amyloid deposition in skeletal muscle. At least in the case of APP holoprotein overexpression, significant muscle weakening has also been observed. Although these changes are by no means a complete model of the disease, the fact that so many aspects of the pathology can be created by the overexpression of one protein is perhaps the strongest evidence for a causal role of APP in this disease.

The debate that surrounds the role of A␤ in IBM is reminiscent of the one that has split the AD research community for an even longer period. The question arises from a simple limitation of the available data: observations of end-stage pathology can only tell us so much about what caused it to occur. Are the A␤, or the A␤-containing fragments, within inclusion bodies indicators of a primary event in the disease process? Or is A␤ merely a marker of cellular damage brought about by something else? Given that this statement is hardly a leap of perception, the persistent nature of these arguments is remarkable. It is clear that a cause-and-effect relationship must either be established or the presence of A␤ dismissed as an epiphenomenon. In this regard, there are lessons to be learned from the AD field.

A model which mirrors every aspect of the human condition is not necessary to test hypotheses about the disease process as long as the limitations of the model used are recognized. Indeed, if a complete model were required upfront, there would be virtu-ally no therapeutic research and development in transgenic mice for any disease. If the assumption is that A␤ is the driving factor in the disease process, then a sufficient animal model only needs to generate and deposit A␤ in the target organ; downstream pathology is a bonus, and not necessarily required.

A second lesson is that no matter how vast the evidential mountain becomes supporting A␤ as the major causal factor in AD, one can be certain that the peptide's disputed role can only be satisfactorily resolved by showing that the human disease itself can be slowed or prevented by therapies targeted against A␤'s production or deposition. It is necessary that, in a chain of inductive reasoning, one must at some point go back and prove that the primary assumption of the hypothesis was correct to begin with.

The key is to reach the point where there is enough accumulated data to do this. Now, as potential treatments for AD work their way through various levels of preclinical and clinical development, this stage has finally been reached.

Though it might appear that a definitive evaluation of A␤'s role in IBM is lagging far behind that of AD, this is not so: the experience gained from the study of AD has marked a trail for IBM investigators. It may not exactly be a pristine thoroughfare, but it is at least a reasonably clear path to take. In our view, there are two main, interconnected routes to follow: observations based on what is already known of AD molecular genetics and cell biology, and pharmacologic experiments in IBM transgenic mouse models. Following these leads it may be possible to rule in or out a role for A␤ and amyloid in IBM.

The genetic approach. Over the past two decades, numerous reports have contributed to a detailed understanding of APP metabolism. A␤ is a proteolytic product derived from APP by the sequential cleavage of two membrane bound enzymes, ␤and ␥-secretase (both of which are considered to be prime targets for the development of anti-AD pharmaceuticals). 3,14 ␤-Secretase first cleaves APP to release a large secreted derivative (sAPP␤) and generate a membrane-bound, 99-amino-acid C-terminal fragment, CTF␤; this fragment is a substrate for ␥-secretase, and is the immediate precursor for A␤. ␥-Secretase cleaves CTF␤ within the membrane to produce A␤ and a cytosolic fragment, AICD (APP intracellular domain, also referred to as CTF␥). After cleavage, nearly all A␤ is secreted and the AICD translocates to the nucleus, where it plays some role in transcription. [15][16][17] Numerous different A␤ species are generated during this process, but A␤1-40 (A␤40) is the major peptide product (90%), followed by A␤1-42 (A␤42, 5% to 10%). This latter form is both more fibrillogenic and is the principally deposited form in the AD brain. These A␤ aggregates can indirectly or directly cause neurotoxic effects. For instance, an increase in A␤, either through the injection of aggregated peptide or through the overexpression of APP, increases the rate of neurofibrillary tangle pathology in transgenic mice coexpressing mutant tau protein. 18,19 Higher order, oligomeric forms of A␤ are similarly both toxic and cause deficits in long-term potentiation. 20,21 One of the strongest pillars of support for what has come to be known as the "amyloid cascade hypothesis" originates from a small number of families carrying mutations giving rise to AD. A large number of mutations in the genes encoding APP, or presenilins (PS) 1 or 2 (believed to form the active site of the ␥-secretase enzyme), are linked to autosomal dominant, early-onset forms of the disease. These mutations, exhibiting either complete or nearly complete penetrance, either increase the total amount of A␤, 22,23 selectively increase the relative amounts of the longer, more insoluble 42-amino-acid form, 24,25 or alter the properties of the peptide to make it more prone to fibril formation. 26 In these families, changes in the amounts and properties of A␤ are not restricted to the brain, being observed in plasma, and from primary fibroblast cultures. 24 If there is an underlying connection between AD and IBM, one that reflects a role of A␤, it could reasonably be expected that affected individuals within these families might also show a significant increase in the incidence of IBM, or at least in IBM-like pathology. We are unaware of clinical data that address this issue. It is unlikely that such an association would have been noticed in asymptomatic carriers or in the early stages of dementia. It is possible that if IBM pathology developed some period of time after the onset of dementia, it could be overlooked.

Our knowledge of AD genetics and APP biology can be extended to the creation of transgenic mice modeling IBM. Because the overexpression of FADlinked mutant APPs or the coexpression of mutant APP and FAD-linked PSs in the brains of transgenic mice leads to A␤ deposition and other AD-like pathologies 27 , it would be a simple matter to generate and cross the appropriate mutants and evaluate the resulting IBM-like pathology. For instance, a knock in mutant PS1 mouse could be crossed with an appropriate model of human APP expression in muscle. 13 If IBM is truly similar to AD, then the development of muscle pathology will be accelerated.

The pharmacologic approach.

There is no doubt that the over expression of mutant forms of APP in muscle causes pathology in mice. What has not been resolved is what "piece" of APP is responsible. For example, is A␤ responsible or is the pathology being caused by APP CTFs, which are also known to be cytotoxic? Given the selectivity of the pharmacologic agents developed recently in the AD field, researchers now have the tools at their disposal to tease apart the relative contributions of the different parts of the APP processing pathway. We will consider here three of the more promising strategies: modulation of A␤42 levels, modulation of the total amount of A␤ and APP CTFs, and the targeted removal of the extracellular vs intracellular pools of A␤. Chronic use of nonaspirin NSAIDs is widely acknowledged to reduce the risk of AD. 28 A subset of NSAIDs can act to selectively modulate A␤42 production, both in cell culture and in APP transgenic mice. [29][30][31] For example, ibuprofen is effective at lowering A␤42 production and reversing AD-like pathology in the brains of Tg2576 mice, whereas naproxen is ineffective. This effect is independent of antiinflammatory activity mediated through the inhibition of the cyclooxygenase enzymes (COX) and many other known targets of these compounds. [31][32][33] Although these compounds likely target the ␥-secretase enzyme, they appear to act to allosterically modulate activity by shifting cleavage sites to generate shorter secreted peptides. 29,31,34,35 Similarly, other compounds can act in the opposite manner, increasing the proportion of longer fragments at the expense of the shorter ones. 36 If IBM pathology is driven by the production of A␤42, then treatment with A␤42lowering compounds will either prevent or reverse the development of pathology, whereas raising compounds will cause it to accelerate. If these compounds are ineffective, this would point to a mechanism other than A␤42 production.

Inhibition of the ␥-secretase enzyme has long been a goal for the potential treatment of AD, and several compounds are now available that can be used in IBM mouse models. This strategy contrasts with the preceding one in that enzymatic activity is inhibited rather than modified. An indicator of ␥-secretase inhibition is the accumulation of ␥-secretase substrates, such as APP CTFs. 37 Therefore, treatment of transgenic mice that overexpress the full-length APP holoprotein with a ␥-secretase inhibitor will both reduce A␤ and cause CTFs to accumulate. As noted above, the overexpression of APP CTF␤ in mice leads to the development of various aspects of IBM pathology. 11,12 Should APP CTFs be the major factor in the development of pathology in the model, then treatment with a global inhibitor of ␥-secretase activity will cause the condition of the animals to worsen in spite of a reduction in the amount of A␤.

Active immunization with aggregated A␤ plus adjuvant and passive immunization with anti-A␤ antibodies have both been shown to reduce plaque burden in several strains of APP transgenic mice, and to attenuate at least some of the cognitive deficits present in these models. [38][39][40][41][42][43] A major difference between the nature of the A␤ lesions in AD vs IBM is their location: amyloid-containing plaques in AD are extracellular, whereas the inclusion bodies in IBM are intracellular. 2,6 Although there have been numerous reports of the presence of intracellular A␤ in AD, its significance is unknown. 44,45 One possibility is that a potentially toxic pool of intracellular A␤ originates as the result of A␤ being reinternalized as a noxious oligomeric species. 20,46 In a recent paper, Oddo et al. 47 showed that passive immunotherapy was able to ameliorate intracellular A␤ pathology in an AD transgenic mouse model. Because it is highly unlikely that an administered antibody is able to directly affect targets within the cell, this finding strongly supports the possibility that pathologic intracellular A␤ may originate from the extracellular pool. This might also be the case with IBM, although the approach has not yet been attempted.

Conclusion.

Unlike AD, IBM is not a prevalent disease. The low incidence of IBM means that there will be limited resources to study it, and that it will be difficult to conduct well-controlled clinical trials. However, investigation of the role of APP and A␤ in IBM could provide important insight into AD, and have influence over its therapeutic options as well. Ultimately, if the two pathologies prove to be related, it may be that therapies developed to treat AD might be useful in IBM, or that therapies developed in preclinical studies in mice that mimic IBM pathology might be tested in humans with AD.

Other approaches are likely to become feasible to further test the involvement of A␤ as a contributor to IBM pathophysiology. Further genetic advances, such as the knockout or upregulation of A␤ degrading enzymes, could produce more informative transgenic crosses. In the realm of pharmacologic manipulation, inhibitors of ␤-secretase would be useful to evaluate. Unlike inhibitors of ␥-secretase, these would reduce both A␤ and CTF␤. Other treatments taking advantage of different mechanisms, such as metal chelation with agents such as clioquinol 48 or treatment with natural compounds such as green tea extract, 49 may also be worth pursuing. This mechanistic information will help to determine whether or not APP is worth further study as the pathologic basis of IBM, or if researchers should look elsewhere. We may not only get closer to a better understanding of the degenerative process itself, but closer to a workable treatment for the disease as well.

