Mitochondrial abnormalities in inclusion-body myositis

Mitochondrial changes are frequently encountered in sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM). Cytochrome c oxidase (COX)-deficient muscle fibers and large-scale mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) deletions are more frequent in s-IBM than in age-matched controls. COX deficient muscle fibers are due to clonal expansion of mtDNA deletions and point mutations in segments of muscle fibers. Such segments range from 75 m to more than 1,000 m in length. Clonal expansion of the 4977 bp "common deletion" is a frequent cause of COX deficient muscle fiber segments, but many other deletions also occur. The deletion breakpoints cluster in a few regions that are similar to what is found in human mtDNA deletions in general. Analysis in s-IBM patients of three nuclear genes associated with multiple mtDNA deletions, POLG1, ANT1 and C10orf2, failed to demonstrate any mutations. In s-IBM patients with high number of COX-deficient fibers, the impaired mitochondrial function probably contribute to muscle weakness and wasting. Treatment that has positive effects in mitochondrial myopathies may be tried also in s-IBM.

Mitochondrial myopathies. Mitochondrial disorders constitute a group of diseases in which the oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) is impaired. Any tissue may be involved in these disorders but the nervous system and skeletal muscle are commonly affected. 3,4 Most mitochondrial diseases are genetic disorders and the gene defect may be located in either the mitochondrial genome (mtDNA) or the nuclear genome (nDNA). mtDNA is a circular molecule of 16.569 bp encoding 13 subunits in four of the five enzyme complexes of the respiratory chain in addition to 22 tRNA genes and two rRNA genes necessary for the synthesis of mtDNA encoded polypeptides. Only 13 of the 89 subunits in the respiratory chain are encoded by mtDNA, and it has been estimated that mtDNA mutations are responsible for approximately 20% of the OXPHOS diseases. However, the majority of mitochondrial disorders, in which the etiology has been established, are due to primary mtDNA mutations. mtDNA with pathogenic mutations usually exists together with wild-type mtDNA, so-called heteroplasmy. The mtDNA mutations are functionally recessive and, because there are hundreds to thousands of mtDNA copies in each cell, the proportion of mutant molecules is essential for the phenotypic expression of a mutation. When there is a high mutational load and low levels of wild-type mtDNA, the cell will be affected by a biochemical defect of the OXPHOS system. The threshold level for expression of mtDNA mutations at the cellular level is usually high (85% to 95% mutant mtDNA), but varies between different mutations. The pathogenic mutations in mtDNA are either point mutations, which frequently affect tRNA genes, or large-scale deletions, which remove several tRNA genes as well as genes encoding polypeptides. Mitochondrial myopathies that are due to mtDNA mutations usually exhibit so-called ragged-red fibers. These are muscle fibers with abnormal accumulation of mitochondria, which show abnormal ultrastructure. The ragged-red fibers frequently show enzymehistochemical deficiency of complex IV (COX) of the respiratory chain.

An increasing number of mitochondrial disorders due to nuclear gene mutations have been identified. 3,5 Because transcription and replication of mtDNA is under nuclear control, 6 some mitochondrial diseases are due to nuclear gene mutations with secondary mtDNA mutations, which are re-sponsible for the disease manifestations. [7][8][9][10] In such disorders, there are multiple, different mtDNA mutations in affected tissues. Myopathies caused by such mutations have the same morphologic features as myopathies due to primary mtDNA mutations. Nuclear gene mutations may also lead to a reduction in mtDNA copy number (mtDNA depletion), which will cause defective oxidative phosphorylation in affected tissues. 11 Mitochondrial DNA mutations in aging. In normal aging, accumulation of small amounts of mtDNA with point mutations 12,13 and deletions 14,15 has been observed in various human tissues including muscle. This has lead to a hypothesis that mutations of mtDNA are of importance in the aging process. 16 Deficiency of COX in some muscle fiber segments is a frequent finding in elderly subjects. 17 In normal aging, it has been demonstrated that mtDNA with mutations expand clonally in muscle fiber segments, which leads to focal defects of oxidative phosphorylation. 18 A mutation in mtDNA polymerase gamma (PolgA) in the mouse results in multiple somatic mtDNA mutations and a premature aging phenotype. 19 This finding indicates that somatic mtDNA mutations are one important cause of aging.

Mitochondrial abnormalities in s-IBM. Morphologic alterations of mitochondria in s-IBM.

Mitochondrial changes in s-IBM were described and considered of pathogenic importance 20 years ago 1,20 and later shown to be more prevalent in s-IBM than in polymyositis, dermatomyositis, and normal aging. 21,22 The morphologic changes consist of muscle fibers with abnormal mitochondrial proliferation, some of them being ragged-red fibers, which in most instances show deficient enzyme-histochemical COX activity (figure 1A). The mitochondria in ragged-red fibers show ultrastructural abnormalities, which frequently encounter paracrystalline inclusions (figure 2). The COX-deficient fibers do not always show mitochondrial proliferation and they are usually not associated with invasion of inflammatory cells or rimmed vacuoles. 23,24 From a morphologic point of view the muscle biopsy in s-IBM may in some cases look like a mitochondrial myopathy with inflammation. However, the mitochondrial changes are variable and COX-deficient fibers may be present at a level not different from what can be expected in normal aging but may be as frequent as 15% of the fibers. 21,22 COX-deficient muscle fibers occur in 98% of muscle biopsies of patients with proven s-IBM. 25 The COX deficiency affects segments of the muscle fibers (figure 1B). To investigate the length of the COX-deficient fiber segments, serial sections of muscle biopsies from two s-IBM patients with numerous COX-deficient fibers were investigated (figure 3). The results showed that the length of COX-deficient segments was extremely variable with a median of 330 m, implying that the majority of muscle fibers in large muscles of most s-IBM patients will contain one or more COX-deficient segments. mtDNA mutations in s-IBM. By applying in situ hybridization, it was demonstrated that many COXdeficient ragged-red fibers in s-IBM patients had accumulated mtDNA with large-scale deletions. 26 By extended studies using several different DNA probes on serial sections, it could be demonstrated that there are different deletions in different muscle fiber segments, 22,23,27 implying that clones of mtDNA with large-scale deletions expand focally and cause segmental COX deficiency. The occurrence of one unique deletion in each COX-deficient segment was also supported by analysis of isolated single muscle fibers. 22 In one study, occasional COX-deficient fiber segments appeared with reduced levels (depletion) of mtDNA. 23 The finding of COX-deficient segments of variable lengths indicates that once a mutated clone has started to expand, it may continue to eventually include a very extended segment of a muscle fiber.

By a sensitive PCR analysis, it was possible to identify multiple mtDNA deletions in most s-IBM patients. 22,28 The more quantitative Southern blot analysis failed to demonstrate the deletions in approximately 60% of the cases, 26,28,29 implying that the amount of mtDNA with deletions is variable and in most cases low. The deletion breakpoints have been analyzed in detail in 33 different mtDNA deletions in s-IBM. 30 Whereas the "common deletion," which is flanked by a 13 bp direct repeat, was found to be the most frequent deletion, numerous other deletions have also been characterized. Many of these deletions are not flanked by direct repeats. The deletion breakpoints are clustered in certain regions, with one 5= end in region 5745-5802 and another in region 8083-9267 (figure 4). The 5= end of the "common deletion" is in the center of the latter region (position 8469). Two regions with clusters of 3= ends of deletions were identified: one in region 13445-14556 and the other in region 15925-16078 with a hot spot around position 16070 (figure 4). This distribution of deletion breakpoints is similar to what was reported in a study on the distribution of 263 different human mtDNA deletions. 31 From the results of the latter study, it was concluded that the vast majority of mtDNA deletions are related to the 13 bp direct repeats beginning at nucleotides 8470 and 13447, and that deletions probably occur during mtDNA replication. 31 To investigate the occurrence of clonally expanded point mutations and to analyze the frequency of the common deletion among COX-deficient muscle fibers, single COX-deficient fibers were isolated and four different mtDNA regions were amplified from each fiber by PCR (figure 5). Altogether, 60 muscle fiber segments from four s-IBM patients (63-80 years of age) were analyzed. Mitochondrial DNA mutations were identified in 10 of the 60 fibers. High levels of the "common deletion" were present in nine fibers and a tRNA Gln G4378A point mutation was present at near homoplasmic level in one fiber. This mutation is not previously described but it is probably the cause of the COX deficiency since the mutation alters a highly conserved base pairing in tRNA Gln (figure 6). The results show that clonal expansion of the "common deletion" is a frequent cause of COX deficient fibers in s-IBM and that some COX deficient fibers may be due to clonal expansion of mtDNA point mutations. The occurrence of occasional fibers with tRNA point mutations is not surprising because this occurs also in normal aging. 18 Pathogenesis and effects of mtDNA mutations in s-IBM. It is not clear why there is a high frequency of multiple mtDNA deletions and COX-deficient muscle fibers in many patients with s-IBM. It may be hypothesized that one or more factor increase the susceptibility of mtDNA to form defective copies with deletions during replication. Once the deleted molecules have formed they may propagate because of replicative advantage due to their small size. Clonal expansion of somatic, multiple, large-scale mtDNA deletions have been demonstrated also in other conditions, such as late-onset mitochondrial myopathy, 32 autosomal dominant progressive external ophthalmoplegia (adPEO), 33 and to a lesser degree in normal aging. 18,34 Hereditary disorders with multiple mtDNA deletions have been associated with mutations in the nuclear genes encoding thymidine phos-  To study the size of COX-deficient muscle fiber segments, a 1,000-m thick part of a muscle biopsy from each of two patients with s-IBM was cut in 15-m thick cross-sections. These were double-stained for COX and succinate dehydrogenase to identify the blue COX-deficient muscle fiber segments. Fifty-eight COX-deficient segments were identified and the length of each segment was estimated. The length of the COX-deficient segments varied from 75 m to more than 1 mm. phorylase (ECGF1), 7 adenine nucleotide translocator 1 (ANT1), 8 twinkle (C10orf2), 9 and mtDNA polymerase gamma (POLG1). 10 We investigated three of these genes in five s-IBM patients (63 to 80 years of age) with a high proportion COX-deficient fibers and multiple mtDNA deletions in muscle (figure 7). The POLG1, ANT1 and C10orf2 genes were amplified from genomic DNA [7][8][9][10] and mutations were screened for by direct sequencing, using an ABI Prism 377 DNA sequencer, and Big Dye Terminator Kit 1.1 (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). However, no mutations were identified in any of these genes in the s-IBM patients. This does not exclude a genetic factor, but it is also possible that other factors that are part of the disease process directly or indirectly affect proteins, such as polymerase gamma and twinkle, which are important for mtDNA maintenance and replication. [35][36][37] In this context, it is of interest that the combination of inflammation and COXdeficient muscle fibers but absence of rimmed vacuoles is found in "inflammatory myopathy with COX - muscle fibers" (IM/COX -). 38,39 This is an inflammatory myopathy with predominant involvement of the quadriceps muscle and with multiple mtDNA deletions in muscle similar to what is found in s-IBM. The demarcation between (IM/COX -) and s-IBM is not quit clear because rimmed vacuoles may be absent in muscle biopsies also from patients with definite s-IBM. 25 The clinical importance of the multiple mtDNA deletions in muscle is difficult to evaluate on the background of all the other changes that are present. However, presence of numerous muscle fiber segments with defective oxidative phosphorylation will probably affect the muscle tissue in several ways. The degree of mitochondrial changes found in the muscle biopsies of some s-IBM patients are comparable to what can be seen in some mitochondrial myopathies, where muscle weakness and fatigue are important symptoms. Because the overall amount of mtDNA mutations appear to be low in IBM, they should theoretically not affect the overall capacity of oxidative phorphorylation in muscle tissue. Accordingly, studies using 31 P magnetic resonance spectroscopy have not shown any impairment of oxidative metabolism in s-IBM muscle. 40,41 Clonal expansions of mtDNA deletions and point mutations account for COX-deficient fibers that oc-  30 The upper panel is a linear map of mtDNA including the tRNA genes (short bars marked with single letters) and the thirteen proteincoding genes. The bars in the lower part of the panel illustrate the different deletions, with the "common deletion" marked with a thicker bar than the others. The deletion breakpoints are clustered in different regions. Figure 5. To investigate the occurrence of clonally expanded mtDNA point mutations and to estimate how frequent the 4977 bp "common deletion" is in COX-deficient fibers in s-IBM, single muscle fibers (n ϭ 60 from four patients, 1 to 4) were dissected 22 and analyzed. The upper panel is a linear map of mtDNA including the tRNA genes (short bars marked with single letters) and the 13 proteincoding genes. To screen for point mutations three segments of mtDNA including five tRNA genes were amplified by PCR (primer pairs marked A, B, and C in upper panel) in each single fiber and then sequenced. 18 To identify and quantify the "common deletion," a competitive PCR analysis with three primers was performed with DNA from each fiber segment (primers marked D in upper panel). The PCR was performed with a fluorescin-labeled (6-FAM) forward primer corresponding to light strand nt 8161-8180 and two backward primers corresponding to heavy strand nt 8558-8537 and nt 13640-13621 for 25 cycles (94°C, 30 seconds; 55°C, 30 seconds; 72°C, 30 seconds). The PCR fragments were separated on a 4% polyacrylamide gel using a model 377 DNA sequencer. Quantification was performed using the GeneScan software (Applied Biosystems, CA). Results (lower panel) showed the "common deletion" in 9 of the 60 COX-deficient fibers. In one fiber from Patient 4, a high proportion of a tRNA Gln G4738A point mutation was identified. The proportion of the G4738G mutation was estimated by PCR-RFLP analysis using a 6-FAM labeled forward primer (nt 4145-4167) and a backward primer (nt 4399-4371) and PCR conditions as above except that 35 cycles were applied. The PCR product was cleaved over night by RsaI, which cuts the PCR fragment carrying the mutation. Quantification was performed as described above.

cur in aging, 18,34 similar to what is found in s-IBM. The difference appears to be mainly quantitative because the mtDNA deletion break-points in aging are similar to those found in s-IBM. 30 The high frequency of multiple large-scale mtDNA deletions in s-IBM has been regarded as possibly reflecting an accelerated aging process. 28 In normal aging, the mtDNA mutations have been demonstrated to be associated with muscle fiber atrophy, and it has been postulated that mtDNA mutations are an important factor for development of sarcopenia in aging. 42,43 The mtDNA mutations in s-IBM muscle may thus contribute to muscle atrophy and weakness. Mitochondrial defects in s-IBM may also be due to other factors involved in the disease process. For example, it has been demonstrated that transfer of betaamyloid precursor protein (beta APP) gene using adenovirus vector causes mitochondrial abnormalities in cultured normal human muscle. 44 Because beta APP is upregulated in vacuolated muscle fibers of s-IBM, 45,46 this may be an additional factor causing impaired respiratory chain function.

Whereas mtDNA mutations may increase the disposition for apoptotic cell death, 47 the importance of apoptosis for death of the multinucleated muscle fibers in mitochondrial diseases is a controversial subject. 48 However, apoptosis is not a prominent feature of s-IBM. [49][50][51][52] Treatment of the mitochondrial myopathy that occurs in some s-IBM patients would include either treatment to neutralize the negative effects of defective oxidative phosphorylation or removal of the mutated mtDNA molecules. In disorders due to primary mtDNA mutations, there is at present no curative treatment. 53 CoQ10 is frequently used because it is a component of the respiratory chain that may be reduced in mitochondrial diseases and acts as an oxygen radical scavenger. 54,55 Although the positive effects have not been unequivocally proven, CoQ10 treatment could possibly be beneficial also in s-IBM. Vitamin C is another free-radical scavenger that has been considered in treatment of s-IBM. 56 Other compounds that have been tried in mitochondrial diseases include vitamin K, riboflavin, thiamine, folic acid, L-carnitine, and creatine, but with limited and uncertain effects. 57 Gene shifting has been discussed as a method to reduce the relative amount of mutant mtDNA, and it can in some instances be accomplished by induction of muscle fiber damage and regeneration if the satellite cells do not harbor the mtDNA mutation. 58,59 It is not likely that this would be feasible in s-IBM because this is a chronic disease with de-and regeneration, and regenerating fibers in s-IBM are sometimes COX-deficient. 22 Whether physical training has positive or negative effects in   7. Demonstration of multiple mtDNA deletions in three of the five s-IBM patients that were analyzed for mutations in the POLG1, ANT1, and C10orf2 genes.Total DNA was extracted from frozen muscle tissue using the DNA Extraction Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Longexpand PCR (LX-PCR) was performed as described. 63 Using this method, a 10.8-kb fragment of mtDNA, including the "major arc," is amplified. The PCR products were separated on a 0.6% agar gel stained with GelStar and visualized on a Dark Reader Blue light transilluminator (Clare Chemical Research, Dolores, CO). Muscle DNA from two normal individuals and from one individual known to harbor multiple mtDNA deletions secondary to a POLG1 mutation served as controls for the LX-PCR reaction.

various myopathies is a matter of debate. In one study on s-IBM, no adverse effects were encountered by a home exercise program. 60 In mitochondrial diseases aerobic training seems to have mainly positive effects, 61 which may indicate that physical exercise in s-IBM, from a mitochondrial point of view, would be beneficial.

Supported by grants from the Swedish Medical Research Council (Proj. No 7122), King Gustav V 80th Anniversary Fund, the Swedish Rheumatism Association, and the Go ¨teborg Medical Society.

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. Enzyme histochemical analysis of skeletal muscle in a patient with s-IBM with double staining of cytochrome c oxidase (COX) and succinate dehydrogenase. 62 (A) Multiple fibers are COX deficient as seen in a cross section. (B)The COX deficiency is segmental as seen in a longitudinal section. Blue fibers are COX deficient.

Figure 2 .2Figure 2. Electron micrograph showing mitochondria with paracrystalline inclusions (arrows) in the subsarcolemmal region of a muscle fiber.

Figure 3 .3Figure 3. To study the size of COX-deficient muscle fiber segments, a 1,000-m thick part of a muscle biopsy from each of two patients with s-IBM was cut in 15-m thick cross-sections. These were double-stained for COX and succinate dehydrogenase to identify the blue COX-deficient muscle fiber segments. Fifty-eight COX-deficient segments were identified and the length of each segment was estimated. The length of the COX-deficient segments varied from 75 m to more than 1 mm.

Figure 4 .4Figure 4. Illustration of the distribution of 32 different mtDNA deletions in s-IBM patients.30 The upper panel is a linear map of mtDNA including the tRNA genes (short bars marked with single letters) and the thirteen proteincoding genes. The bars in the lower part of the panel illustrate the different deletions, with the "common deletion" marked with a thicker bar than the others. The deletion breakpoints are clustered in different regions.

Figure 6 .6Figure 6. The identified point mutation, tRNA Gln G4738A (upper panel) disrupted a highly conserved base pairing (lower panel).

FigureFigure 7. Demonstration of multiple mtDNA deletions in three of the five s-IBM patients that were analyzed for mutations in the POLG1, ANT1, and C10orf2 genes.Total DNA was extracted from frozen muscle tissue using the DNA Extraction Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Longexpand PCR (LX-PCR) was performed as described.63 Using this method, a 10.8-kb fragment of mtDNA, including the "major arc," is amplified. The PCR products were separated on a 0.6% agar gel stained with GelStar and visualized on a Dark Reader Blue light transilluminator (Clare Chemical Research, Dolores, CO). Muscle DNA from two normal individuals and from one individual known to harbor multiple mtDNA deletions secondary to a POLG1 mutation served as controls for the LX-PCR reaction.

