Inclusion-body myositis A myodegenerative conformational disorder associated with A␤, protein misfolding, and proteasome inhibition

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM), the most common muscle disease of older persons, is of unknown cause and there is no successful treatment. We summarize our most recent findings, which provide a better understanding of the steps in the pathogenetic cascade. We suggest that s-IBM is primarily a myodegenerative disease. Intriguing are the phenotypic similarities between s-IBM muscle fibers and the brains of Alzheimer disease, the most common neurodegenerative disease of older persons. In s-IBM, abnormal accumulation of the amyloid-␤ (A␤) precursor protein and its proteolytic fragment, A␤, associated with the aging intracellular milieu of the muscle fiber, appear to be key upstream pathogenic events. We propose that the identified abnormal accumulation, misfolding, and aggregation of proteins, perhaps provoked by the aging milieu and aggravated by the oxidative stress, lead to the s-IBM-specific vacuolar degeneration and atrophy of muscle fibers.

NEUROLOGY 2006;66(Suppl 1):S39-S48

Traditionally, sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM) has been considered an inflammatory myopathy, together with polymyositis and dermatomyositis, and several reviews have addressed the inflammatory aspects of those disorders. [1][2][3] Although the inflammatory component of s-IBM muscle biopsies is undisputable, s-IBM patients as a group respond poorly to antidysimmune treatment, in contrast to polymyositis and dermatomyositis patients 3,4 (also see the articles by Engel and Askanas 4a and Griggs 4b in this issue), suggesting that other factors contributing to s-IBM pathogenesis may be more important.

We propose that the degenerative component occurring in s-IBM muscle fibers plays an important pathogenic role. We postulate that the s-IBM milieu of the aging muscle fiber is important in promoting development of the IBM-characteristic progressive vacuolar degeneration and the characteristic ectopic expression of several potentially toxic proteins, which may underlie disease progression. We have previously suggested that the aging milieu of the s-IBM muscle fiber and of the total patient may also influence provocation of, and/or response to, the lymphocytic inflammation. 4,5,6 Accordingly, we consider s-IBM a myodegenerative muscle disease occurring in an aged muscle cellular environment, associated with intracellular accumulation and aggregation of several proteins, and involving abnormal signal transduction and transcription, all of which lead to the IBM-specific characteristic muscle degenerative process.

In this article we are focusing on the proposed leading role of amyloid-␤ (A␤) in the inclusion-body myositis (IBM) pathogenesis, and describe the crucial role of misfolded proteins, protein aggregation, and proteasome inhibition in contributing to the degeneration of the IBM muscle fiber and to its unusual pathologic phenotype. Several other abnormalities and our hypotheses were reported previously. 4,5,6,7 Possible significance of morphologic and molecular similarities between IBM muscle and Alzheimer-disease brain. An intriguing feature of the s-IBM muscle-fiber phenotype is its similarity to the Alzheimer-disease (AD) brain, including accumulation of A␤, phosphorylated tau (p-tau) and several other Alzheimer-characteristic proteins [4][5][6][7] (table). Because the same proteins accumulate within IBM muscle fibers as accumulate in the brain of AD patients, the muscle and the brain diseases might share certain pathogenic steps, and knowledge of one disease might help elucidate the other. Cellular aging and evidence of oxidative stress are associated with IBM and AD. Both IBM and AD include sporadic and hereditary forms, and both are multifactorial and polygenetic. The respective cascades of events leading to the similar pathologic aspects are not understood. Aggregation of proteins, proteins misfolding, and proteasome inhibition have been proposed to contribute to the s-IBM 5,6 and the AD pathogenesis. [8][9][10] Yet each disease category remains organ-specific, involving postmitotic muscle fibers or postmitotic neurons. IBM patients do not develop dementia and AD patients do not have the muscle weakness characteristic of IBM, indicating that the mechanism of organ targeting is different in IBM and AD. The tissue affected, muscle vs brain, may be influenced by: 1) etiologic agent (a virus), 2) previous exposure to environmental factor(s), and 3) the patient's genetic background (the cellular microclimate).

In AD, it has been suggested that abnormal proteolytic processing of amyloid-␤ precursor protein (A␤PP) leads to extracellular liberation of free A␤, which then aggregates into extracellular congophilic ␤-pleated sheets composed of 6-to 10-nm amyloid fibrils, which themselves are clustered as amyloid plaques. 11,12,13 For years it has been considered that it is the extracellular A␤ that is exerting a detrimental role in AD brain, leading to AD. 12,13 Several years ago we have proposed that intracellular accumulation and toxicity of A␤PP, and of its proteolytic fragment A␤, play a key central role in IBM pathogenic cascade 4,6 and postulated that the same might be occurring in AD pathogenesis. 7 This proposal regarding AD now seems to be gaining momentum because more and more AD researchers discuss the possible importance of intracellular A␤ accumulation and tox-icity in AD pathogenesis [14][15][16] (also see the article by Glabe in this issue).

There are no extracellular A␤-containing plaques in s-IBM, even though human muscles fibers experimentally overexpressing A␤PP and A␤ (see below) secrete large amounts of A␤-42 and -40 to their extracellular environment. We suggest that the muscle tissue lacks extracellular components that would serve as plaque induces. Conditioned medium from cultured A␤PP-overexpressing muscle fibers did not, with short-term exposure, toxify normal muscle cultures.

An extracellular myotoxity of A␤ has not been demonstrated in s-IBM.

Abnormalities of A␤PP/A␤ in IBM muscle fibers. Brief background. Since its discovery in 1984, 17 A␤ has received attention regarding the pathogenesis of AD. 12,16 Although pathologic accumulations of A␤ were initially considered to be confined to the brain and its blood vessels, it is now established that A␤/A␤PP is also abnormally accumulated in muscle fibers of s-IBM patients, where they are considered to play an important pathogenetic role. 4,5,6,7 s-IBM muscle fibers also have increased mRNA signal for A␤PP-75, which contains the Kunitz-type protease inhibitor (KPI) motif. 18 The mechanism of A␤PP overproduction in s-IBM is not yet well under- stood, but our newest studies suggest that activation of the AP-1 transcription complex may play a role. 19 Abnormalities of A␤PP processing. In addition to the increased synthesis of A␤PP, we have demonstrated abnormal processing of A␤PP processing in s-IBM muscle fibers.

BACE1 and BACE2, glycosylated transmembrane ␤-secretases that cleave A␤PP at the N-terminal of A␤, [20][21][22][23] are increased in s-IBM muscle fibers where they are accumulated in the form of inclusions colocalizing with A␤. 24,25 Also, BACE1 coimmunoprecipitates with A␤PP in s-IBM muscle (Vattemi and  Askanas, unpublished observation, 2003), suggesting that it may participate in A␤PP processing and abnormal generation of the A␤ there. Nicastrin and presenilins, which are components of the ␥-secretase system that cleaves A␤PP at the C-terminal of A␤, generating either A␤40 or A␤42 26 (see also the article by Thinakaran in this issue), are also strongly overexpressed in s-IBM muscle fibers. There they colocalize with each other and with A␤, 4,5,6,27 and are physically associated with A␤PP in s-IBM and in experimentally A␤PP-overexpressing muscle fibers (Vattemi and Askanas, unpublished observation,  2003). Accordingly, both ␤and ␥-secretases appear to participate in A␤ production within s-IBM muscle fibers.

Preferential accumulation of A␤42. A␤ is a 40-to 42-amino acid peptide, whose toxicity is considerably enhanced by its self-association into toxic oligomers. 30,31 It also forms polymeric ␤-pleated sheet amyloid, 28,29 which might be relatively nontoxic. A␤42 is more hydrophobic and more prone to selfassociation and oligomerization, and it is much more cytotoxic that A␤40. 30,31 In s-IBM muscle fibers, deposits containing A␤42 are much more common than ones containing A␤40. 32 All congophilic (fibrillar, amyloidic) A␤ inclusions contain A␤42, and only some contain both A␤40 and A␤42. 32 Other factors contributing to A␤ production, deposition, and oligomerization. Transglutaminases 1a and 2, which contribute to A␤ aggregation and insolubility by cross-linking A␤ molecules, are present in s-IBM muscle. 33 Cystatin C (CC), an endogenous cysteine-protease inhibitor, was previously proposed to participate in A␤ deposition within amyloid plaques of AD brain. 34,35 In s-IBM muscle fibers, expression of CC is strongly increased. 36 There, CC immunocolocalizes with the A␤ immunoreactivity in the form of inclusions, and it coimmunoprecipitates with A␤PP. 36 Free cholesterol, which in various nonmuscle cells increases A␤ production and amyloidogenesis, is abnormally accumulated in s-IBM muscle fibers. 37 It colocalizes with the abnormally accumulated A␤, phosphorylated tau, and caveolin-1. 37,38 Caveolin-1, a major protein of plasmalemmal microdomain caveolae, is an intracellular transporter of cholesterol, 39 and it is abnormally accumulated within s-IBM muscle fibers. There, caveolin-1 is physically associated with A␤PP in the s-IBM muscle fibers (Vattemi and Askanas, unpublished obser-vation, 2003), suggesting it has a direct role in A␤PP processing. Moreover, in A␤PP-overexpressing cultured human muscle fibers, exposure to cholesterol induces A␤-deposition and overexpression of caveolin-1. 40 We therefore propose that, within s-IBM muscle fibers, cholesterol-instead of being properly metabolized or cleared-is deposited with caveolin-1 inside the IBM muscle fibers at sites of A␤ accumulation and possibly A␤PP processing, and that it influences A␤ deposition there.

Proposed role of A␤PP/A␤ in neuromuscular junction abnormalities. We have demonstrated that transfer of the 751-A␤PP gene, through an adenovirus vector into cultured normal human muscle fibers, results in a long-term overexpression of A␤PP, including its proteolytic fragments A␤40 and 42. 41,42 A␤PP overexpression induces several aspects of the IBM phenotype in those cultured human muscle fibers providing a very suitable "IBM culture model," which we have been using during the last several years. [40][41][42][43] One of the important abnormalities occurring in this model is an inability of the A␤PPoverexpressing (A␤PPϩ) cultured muscle fibers to become innervated by cocultured fetal spinal cord neurons. 43 In contrast to control cultured muscle fibers, which due to their innervation develop de novo well-differentiated neuromuscular junctions (NMJs) that have both acetylcholinesterase and acetylcholine receptors accumulated postsynaptically, A␤PPϩ cultures do not form NMJs. 43 In s-IBM biopsied muscle fibers, ultrastructural abnormalities are present at the postsynaptic domain of the NMJs. 44 In normal biopsied human muscle fibers, A␤PP (including its A␤ epitope) and A␤PP-mRNA, accumulate at the postsynaptic domain of the NMJs, but nowhere else in normal muscle fibers. 45 Accordingly, it appears that A␤PP or A␤ might be directly involved in NMJ abnormalities in human muscle fibers. Perhaps their increase in s-IBM muscle fibers contributes to those junctional abnormalities. Interestingly, A␤ is being implicated in causing synaptic abnormalities in AD brain. 16 Contribution of A␤PP/A␤ to mitochondrial abnormalities. Mitochondrial abnormalities are an important component of the s-IBM pathologic phenotype and its pathogenesis [46][47][48][49] (also see the article by Oldfors in this issue). In our IBM culture-model, A␤PP/A␤ overexpression induces mitochondrial abnormalities and cytochrome C deficiency. 42 How accumulated A␤PP/ A␤ influences mitochondrial abnormalities in our model is not understood, although various possibilities through which A␤ might adversely influence mitochondria function were recently hypothesized. 50 Those authors also emphasized the influence of oligomerized ␣-synuclein in inducing mitochondrial abnormalities, 50 and ␣-synuclein is also accumulated in s-IBM muscle fibers 51 .

Concluding comments regarding A␤PP/A␤ participation in the s-IBM pathogenesis. The mechanisms involved in both the increased transcription of A␤PP and its processing are abnormal in s-IBM muscle fibers. There is increasing evidence that overexpression and accumulation of A␤PP/A␤ may be an early upstream step in the IBM pathogenesis. Studies from our laboratory demonstrated that: 1) abnormal accumulation of A␤PP epitopes appears to precede other abnormalities in IBM muscle fibers, and 2) A␤PP overexpression in cultured normal human muscle fibers induces several aspects of the IBM phenotype. Others have reported that overexpression of A␤PP in muscle of transgenic mice induces aspects of the IBM phenotype. [52][53][54] We propose that, in addition to the abnormalities described above, overexpressed A␤PP-either directly or by its initiallysoluble catabolic product A␤-induces various other abnormalities including tau phosphorylation, oxidative stress, endoplasmic reticulum stress and inhibition of proteasome, which can augment abnormal signal transduction and transcription, creating a self-perpetuating destructive mechanism. Figure 1 illustrates our newest proposed the s-IBM pathogenic cascade.

Protein crowding, unfolding and misfolding.

General comments regarding protein misfolding. In general, protein aggregation is considered to be caused by binding of partly unfolded or misfolded polypeptides induced by interaction between their inappropriately exposed hydrophobic surfaces. 55,56 Those interactions are highly specific. 57 Normal cellular proteins folded correctly are soluble, structural, or associated with cell membranes. 56 . In the IBMs, insoluble aggregates of improperly-folded proteins are usually cytoplasmic, occasionally nuclear. Although fully formed amyloid fibrils, which are insoluble, were previously considered to be cytotoxic, they may not be. There is current experimental evidence that preamyloid oligomeric complexes or aggregates, either diffuse or in a protofibril stage, can be very cytotoxic 55,58 (see also the article by Glabe in this issue).

Unfolding or misfolding of proteins can occur in vivo and in vitro under several circumstances including macromolecular crowding, oxidative stress, exposure to toxins, and "aging." 56,59 Markers of oxidative stress are increased in s-IBM muscle fibers, [4][5][6] and this mechanism might also contribute to unfolding or misfolding of IBM proteins. Diseases characterized by protein misfolding and aggregation are presently considered "conformational diseases." 60 Aggregations of proteins into insoluble intracellular complexes and inclusion-bodies have been proposed to be importantly related to several neurodegenerative disorders, including AD, ALS, Huntington disease, and Parkinson disease (PD). 56,61 Unfolding, misfolding, and aggregation might be attributed to: increased transcription, impaired disposal (see below), and abnormal accumulation and crowding of proteins (leading to their unfolding), and possibly abnormal glycosylation and other deleterious consequences to the proteins and to cellular function.

Protein aggregation and inclusion-body formation in s-IBM muscle fibers. On a given section of an IBM muscle biopsy, the inclusion bodies are present mainly in vacuole-free regions of the vacuolated muscle-fiber cytoplasm and in the cytoplasm of "nonvacuolated" fibers. The vacuoles themselves usually do not contain the IBM-characteristic inclusions. The IBM vacuoles are lysosomal and they are one result of muscle-fiber destruction. The "inclusion body" of IBM muscle was originally described ultrastructurally as a cluster of tubulofilaments of unknown molecular composition. 62 Presently, we recognize two major and characteristic types of inclusions/aggregates in s-IBM muscle fibers: a) the rounded, plaquelike inclusion body (IB) containing prominent amyloid-␤ (A␤) immunoreactivity, the "A␤-IB," and Figure 1. Proposed pathogenetic cascade of s-IBM. In this schema, we consider s-IBM to be a multifactorial muscle disease associated with aging. We propose that various factors, including predisposing genes and possibly infectious agents and other environmental extracorporeal factors in association of aging, lead to key presently-unknown intracellular mechanisms, which cause increased A␤PP-transcription and result in A␤PP overexpression. That overexpression, with participation of factors causing abnormal A␤PP processing, leads to A␤42 Ͼ A␤40 accumulation and oligomerization. Subsequently, the increased A␤, both partially aggregated (oligomerized), and fully aggregated (fibrillar, congophilic), leads to oxidative stress and several other intracellular pathogenic abnormalities, resulting in muscle-fiber degeneration, atrophy, and death. Those abnormalities may be induced either by A␤ acting independently or in conjunction with oxidative stress and other known and unknown cellular disturbances. b) various-sized squiggly, linear inclusion bodies prominently containing phosphorylated tau, "tau-IB" (figure 2, A and B). Both inclusion types are "amyloid"-positive, as evidenced by their reactivity with crystal violet, thioflavin S, and Congo red, indicating that they contain proteins in the ␤pleated-sheet configuration (figure 2, C-E). Ultrastructurally, amyloid-␤-immunoreactive inclusions appear as aggregates of 6-to 10-nm amyloidlike fibrils and amorphous material, whereas inclusions containing phosphorylated tau appear as 15to 21-nm paired-helical filaments (figure 3, A and B).

Both types of inclusions also contain: a) markers of oxidative stress; b) ER-chaperones indicative of the unfolded protein response (UPR); c) 26S proteasome components; d) mutated ubiquitin (UBB ϩ1 ); e) heat-shock proteins; and f) other proteins with propensity to misfold, including ␣-synuclein and prese-nilin1. 5,6 Accordingly, we consider that unfolding and misfolding of the proteins plays a role in the formation of multiprotein-aggregates in s-IBM muscle fibers. The actual mechanisms are gradually being unraveled.

Molecular misreading and accumulation of mutated ubiquitin (UBB ϩ1 ). "Molecular misreading" is a newly discovered phenomenon designating acquired, non-DNA-encoded dinucleotide deletions occurring within mRNAs, resulting in production of potentially toxic mutant proteins 63,64 (see also the article by van Leeuwen in this issue). The aberrant transcripts are formed as a result of dinucleotide loss (⌬GA, ⌬GU) during or after transcription, and they can be translated from the deletion onward into the ϩ1 reading frame to produce abnormal proteins (e.g., mutant ubiquitin, termed UBB ϩ1 ). UBB ϩ1 protein was shown accumulated in the dystrophic neurites as a component of neuritic plaques (containing A␤) and neurofibrillary tangles (containing p-tau) of AD brain 63 and, more recently, found in brains of neurodegenerative disorders in which inhibition of the proteasome has been proposed to play a pathogenetic role. 65 UBB ϩ1 itself can become ubiquitinated, and that form inhibits the proteasome. [63][64][65] Accordingly, accumulation of UBB ϩ1 was proposed to be a marker for proteasomal dysfunction in brain.

In s-IBM muscle fibers, UBB ϩ1 is accumulated in the form of aggregates, which also contain wild-type ubiquitin, A␤, and p-tau. 66 Those associations strongly suggest that UBB ϩ1 might promote formation of those aggregates. One of the mechanisms involved in formation of aggregates/inclusion-bodies composed of misfolded proteins is through inhibition of the "ubiquitin-proteasome system" (UPS). 67 The UPS is the main degradation pathway for proteins, especially short-lived normal, misfolded, or otherwise damaged proteins 67 (also see the article by Ciechanover in this issue). UBB ϩ1 cannot ubiquitinate target proteins due to replacement of the essential C-terminal glycine (G76) with a 20-amino acid resi- 4 and more squiggly inclusions (E), previously shown corresponding to p-tau. 4 Magnification: (A and B) 2200ϫ; (C-E) 910ϫ.

Figure 2. Light microscopy of s-IBM muscle biopsy. Evident in s-IBM muscle fibers are the typical "plaque-like" aggregates/inclusions of A␤ immunoreactivity (A) vs the delicate, "squiggly" inclusions of p-tau immunoreactivity (B). Congo red visualized through a Texas red filter (C and D) demonstrates two types of congophilia in s-IBM muscle fibers: intrafiber plaques (C), previously shown to correspond to A␤,

Figure 3. Immunoelectronmicroscopic features of A␤ and p-tau immunoreactive inclusions/aggregates. A␤ is present on 6-to 10-nm fibrils (A), whereas p-tau is exclusively on paired helical filaments (B). Magnification: 85000ϫ.

due (ϩ1) extension. [63][64][65] However, it itself can be ubiquitinated by wild-type ubiquitin, which binds to lysine residues in UBB ϩ1 , and this form of UBB ϩ1 , if present in high level, inhibits the 26S proteasome and its essential housekeeping proteolytic functions. [63][64][65] Our study showing accumulation of UBB ϩ1 in muscle fibers of s-IBM demonstrated for the first time that molecular misreading can occur in diseased human muscle. We propose that the aging cellular environment of s-IBM muscle fibers, combined with factors such as oxidative stress and perhaps other detrimental molecular events, leads to abnormal production and accumulation of UBB ϩ1 . We propose that in s-IBM muscle UBB ϩ1 contributes to proteasome inhibition.

Evidence that 26S proteasome is inhibited. The 26S proteasome, composed of a catalytic 20S core and a 19S regulatory complex, is a 700 kDa multisubunit protease complex present in the cytoplasm and nucleus of eukaryotic cells. It plays a major role in the degradation of normal and abnormal proteins, through a ubiquitin-mediated ATP-independent process. 9,68 Three ␤ subunits-␤1, ␤2 and ␤5have ␥-interferon-inducible counterparts, 68 which increase trypsin-like (TL), and chymotrypsin-like (CTL) proteasome activities to become optimal for major histocompatibility complex-I (MHC-I) epitope processing. 9,68 Our newest study found significant proteasomal abnormalities in s-IBM muscle fibers as evidenced by: 1) abnormal accumulation of 26S proteasome subunits by immunocytochemistry and immunoelectronmicroscopy; 2) increased expression of 26S proteasome subunits by immunoblots; and contrastingly, 3) reduced activities of the three major proteasomal proteolytic enzymes. 69 This indicates accumulation of inactive/inactivated proteasomal subunit proteins. Our studies strongly suggested that the A␤PP/A␤-proteasome interrelationship may be important in inducing proteasome abnormalities in s-IBM muscle fibers because: 1) A␤ and proteasome subunits colocalized at the light-microscopy level and were associated electron microscopically with the same structures; 2) there was a physical association of A␤/A␤PP and proteasome protein by immunoprecipitation studies; and 3) proteasome activity was inhibited in cultured human muscle fibers overexpressing A␤/A␤PP (i.e., in our culture-IBM model). 69 Other factors present in s-IBM muscle fibers that might contribute to inhibiting proteasome function include an aging muscle-fiber environment, protein overcrowding, oxidative stress, [4][5][6] accumulated p-tau, 4-6 ␣-synuclein, 51 and UBB ϩ1 ; all have been shown to be capable of inhibiting proteasome activity in other systems. 8,[70][71][72] A failure to degrade/remove surplus proteins, including abnormal damaged proteins, would be detrimental to the muscle fiber. Furthermore, accumulated ubiquitinated, misfolded, and oxidized protein aggregates themselves can cause inhibition of proteasome. 73 Moreover, the still-soluble, early interme-diates of protein aggregates, in the form of dimers and trimers, are highly toxic to cells 55,56 (see also the article by Glabe in this issue), and they can also induce proteasome inhibition. 72 Whether proteasomal abnormalities participate in antigen presentation and T-cell inflammation in s-IBM muscle fibers remains to be studied.

Formation of aggresomes. Aggresomes are considered to be microtubule-dependent pericentriolar cytoplasmic structures that form when a cell's capacity to degrade misfolded proteins is diminished. 74 Their formation requires an intact microtubule system, and the presence of ␥-tubulin is their distinctive feature. 74 Aggresomes in other systems contain multiubiquitinated misfolded proteins, and various other proteins, including heat-shock proteins (HSPs) and 20/26S proteasome components. 74 In various mononucleated cells, aggresomes have been induced by overexpression of both normal and mutated proteins combined with proteasome inhibition. 74 Whether aggresomes, in general, contribute to cellular death or protect cells from toxic effects of misfolded proteins remains uncertain. We have recently demonstrated that most of the s-IBM multiprotein aggregates have features of aggresomes because they are associated with ␥-tubulin and contain proteasome subunits, ubiquitin, and HSP70. 69 Aggresome-like structures are also induced in cultured human muscle fibers by overexpressing A␤PP, with or without treatment with epoxomicin, an irreversible proteasome inhibitor. 69 Previously, aggresomes have been produced only in cultured mononucleated cells, where they were described as perinuclear inclusions. 74 However, both in the s-IBM biopsied muscle fibers and in the A␤PP-overexpressing cultured muscle fibers, aggresome-like structures were not associated with the nuclei. 69 This might be related to the fact that a muscle fiber is a multinucleated cell and mechanisms responsible for the location of aggresomes might be different than in a mononucleated cell. Whether or not aggresomes are protective in s-IBM muscle fibers in vivo, and in our IBM-culture model is presently unknown.

Abnormalities of valosin-containing peptide. Valosin-containing peptide (VCP) is a protein belonging to type-II AAA ATPases (ATPpases Associated with a variety of Activities). VCP acts as a molecular chaperone in several cellular activities, including stress response, transcriptional activation, endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD), and in the degrading proteins though the 26S proteasome. 75 In its action in ERAD, VCP was reported to extract the ubiquitinated proteins from the ER membrane before their final degradation by the proteasome. 75 It was proposed that VCP, with help of its cofactors, binds the ubiquitinated protein and prepares the protein before passing it to the 26Sproteasome for degradation. 75 VCP is of particular importance in IBM, because its mutations have been demonstrated in a rare form of autosomal-dominant inclusion-body myopathy, often associated with Paget disease and frontotemporal dementia. 76 In one of the families with VCP mutations, we have found vacuolated muscle fibers and several other aspects of IBM molecular phenotype 77 . The unusual feature of those muscle biopsies was the presence of a large number of congophilic nuclei, in both vacuolated and nonvacuolated muscle fibers, which also contained inclusions strongly immunopositive with p-tau, ApoE and ubiquitin; here we illustrate p-tau immunopositive inclusion (figure 4). Our most recent studies demonstrate that VCP is also strongly immunoreactive in s-IBM muscle fibers, 78 where it accumulates in the form of inclusions, colocalizing with A␤42. Moreover, in our A␤PP-overexpressing and proteasome-inhibited cultured muscle fibers, VCP accumulates in the form of aggregates also colocalizing with A␤. Those studies strongly suggest that VCP plays an important role in IBM pathogenesis.

Evidence that heat shock proteins contribute to proper protein folding and preventing protein aggregation. Molecular chaperones of the HSP70 family constitute a very important group of molecular chaperones, which play a role in protein folding and refolding, and disaggregation of partially unfolded proteins. 79,80 Their induction occurs in response to detrimental cellular conditions causing unfolded proteins. HSP70 binds exposed hydrophobic stretches in proteins, preventing their aggregation. Function of HSP70 depends on ATP binding to a substrate and HSP70 hydrolysis, and it is linked to HSP70 cofactors. HSP40 increases the HSP70 folding function by enhancing ATPase activity of HSP70. 79,80 The cofactor Hip enhances HSP70 function through its binding to the HSP70 ATPase domain. However, interaction of the Bag1co-factor with the HSP70 ATPpase domain causes displacement of the HSP40 and Hip, leading to HSP70 inhibition.

In IBM, 70% to 80% of the vacuolated muscle fibers and several nonvacuolated ones had strongly HSP70-immunoreactive inclusions, which colocalized with HSP40, Hip and Bag1, as well as with A␤ and p-tau immunoreactive inclusions. 81 By immunoblots, HSP70 was 4.5-fold increased as compared to control muscle samples and it associated with A␤ by immunoprecipitation. 81 Accordingly, HSP70 may participate in A␤ refolding, or attempted refolding, and may help the refolding of other proteins in IBM muscle fibers. Association of HSP70 with A␤ was also demonstrated in a C. elegans model overexpressing A␤ in muscle. 82 ␣B-crystallin was shown to be overexpressed in s-IBM abnormal muscle fibers and in several other muscle diseases. 83 ␣B-crystallin belongs to a group of small HSPs, of which ␣B-crystallin and Hsp27 are accumulated within AD plaques. 84 Because both ␣Bcrystallin and Hsp27 are molecular chaperones capable of preventing aggregation of other proteins, it was proposed that overexpression of HSPs s in AD might be a defense response attempting to diminish A␤-fibril formation. 84 However, treatment of neurons in culture with ␣B-crystallin unexpectedly intensified the toxic influence of A␤ on them, which was suggested to be through formation of toxic A␤/␣Bcrystallin aggregates. 84 Recently, ␣B-crystallin has been shown to bind A␤ in the C. elegans model overexpressing A␤ in muscle. 82 In the human s-IBM muscle fibers, ␣B-crystallin immunoreactivity does not colocalize with A␤-immunoreactive deposits (Askanas et al., unpublished observation, 2001). The exact role of ␣B-crystallin in IBM pathogenesis awaits clarification.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress and unfolded protein response The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is an intracellular compartment having a critical role in the processing, folding and exporting of newly synthesized proteins into the secretory pathway 85 (see also the article by Kaufman in this issue). Protein folding in the ER requires an efficient system of molecular chaperones whose role is to assure proper folding of any misfolded proteins. 85 Unfolded proteins accumulating in the ER lead to endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS). 85 This elicits the unfolded protein response, a functional mechanism by which a cell attempts to protect itself against ERS. 85 The UPR involves the following: a) transcriptional induction of ER chaperone proteins whose function is: to both increase the folding capacity of the ER and prevent protein aggregation; b) translational attenuation to reduce protein overload and subsequent accumulation of unfolded proteins; and c) removal of misfolded proteins from the ER through retrograde transport coupled to their degradation by 26S proteasome. We have recently reported in s-IBM muscle fibers evidence of the unfolded protein response. We also demonstrated for the first time that the ER chaperones calnexin, calreticulin, GRP94, BiP/GRP78 and ERp72 physically associate with A␤PP in s-IBM muscle fibers, suggesting their playing role in A␤PP folding and processing. 86 Recently we showed that HERP, another ER chaperone, is regulated in both the IBM-biopsied muscle fibers and in the ER-stressinduced cultured human muscle fibers. 87  Increased myostatin. Myostatin is a negative regulator of muscle growth during development and of muscle mass in adulthood. It is a member of the transforming growth factor␤ (TGF␤) superfamily. 88 A recently reported child with a homozygous g¡a transition at nucleotide g.IVS1 ϩ 5 in the myostatin gene has significantly increased muscle bulk and is unusually strong. 89 That mutation causes missplicing of myostatin mRNA, resulting in reduced production of myostatin protein. 89 Naturally-occurring myostatin gene mutations cause inactive protein, leading to "double-muscle" cattle. 88 In mouse models, knocking out the myostatin gene, overexpressing proteins neutralizing myostatin, or natural mutations of the myostatin gene cause larger muscle mass. 88 Because pronounced muscle atrophy constitutes an important component of s-IBM phenotype, we have studied myostatin in s-IBM muscle fibers, and demonstrated the following 90 : a) by light-and electron-microscopic immunocytochemistry, myostatin is accumulated within muscle fibers and is co-localized with A␤; b) by immunoblots, both myostatin and myostatin-precursor are increased; and c) by immunoprecipitation, myostatin-precursor is complexed with A␤. This study suggests that myostatin/ myostatin-precursor, either alone, or bound to A␤, may play a novel, possibly detrimental, role in the s-IBM pathogenesis. 90 Conclusions regarding pathogenesis, and possible treatment avenues. Based on our studies utilizing s-IBM muscle biopsies and our cultured IBM-mode, we propose the following regarding the s-IBM pathogenesis (also see figure 1).

1. Accumulation of A␤PP/A␤ plays a key pathogenetic role leading to other abnormalities. 2. Misfolding and aggregation of proteins, and inhibition of proteasome caused by increased A␤, (and possibly by other factors) play a major pathogenic role. 3. Proteasome inhibition leads to even further accumulation of A␤, and of several other proteins. 4. Cholesterol binds to A␤, and is accumulated together with A␤ and caveolin-1, in the form of large aggregates, resulting in abnormal cholesterol trafficking. 5. Cholesterol binding to A␤ enhances A␤ oligomerization. This increases A␤ toxicity, which in turn leads to further proteasome inhibition, increased accumulation of misfolded proteins, greater accumulation of cholesterol, and additional cellular toxicity-a vicious cycle.

Based on our studies, we hypothesize that the following approaches are of potential therapeutic value in s-IBM: 1. Stimulate A␤ degradation, or decrease A␤ production. 2. Diminish oligomerization and fibrillization of A␤, and other proteins, perhaps utilizing novel small molecules that are being developed in vitro. 91,92 3. Diminish protein aggregation through protecting and stimulating 26S proteasome activity, and other aspects of the ubiquitin proteasome system. 4. Reduce myostatin, possibly through growth hormone, which decreases myostatin mRNA in human muscle, 88 or through another mechanism. 5. Protect mitochondria possibly with other molecules to be developed. 6. Diminish adverse effects of intra-muscle fibers cholesterol by improving proteasome function (the therapeutic value of high-dose statins is currently uncertain).

Acknowledgment

The authors thank our many research team colleagues who participated over the years in the studies described herein. The most recent collaborators include J. McFerrin, G. Vattemi, P. Fratta, S. Wojcik, A. Nogalska and A. Azturk. We are also grateful to Dr. Zachary Simmons, for his most valuable collaboration with hereditary IBM patients having VCP mutation. Maggie Baburyan provided excellent technical assistance in electronmicroscopy.

Supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (NS31836, NS34103 and AG16768 Merit Award), the Muscular Dystrophy Association, The Myositis Association (to VA), and the Helen Lewis Research Fund.

Figure 4 .4Figure 4. Immunoelectronmicrograph of a muscle nucleus in a patient with a VCP mutation. A large p-tau immunopositive inclusion is present in a muscle-fiber nucleus. Immunoperoxidase reaction. Magnification: 24000ϫ.

TablePhenotypic comparison between s-IBM muscle fibers and Alzheimer disease brainCellular phenotypeIBM in muscle fibers (our data)Alzheimer disease in brain (literature)Amyloid ␤ (A␤) aspectsCongophilia associated with A␤Small "plaquettes," intracellularLarge "plaques," extracellularA␤ in filaments, diameter6-10 nm, intracellular6-8 nm, extracellular, also A␤ intracellularA␤PP-mRNA 751, increasedYesYes (disputed)A␤ aggregatesYesYesUbiquitinYesYesApo EYesYesPresenelin-1YesYesMarkers of oxidative stressYesYesPaired helical filaments (PHFs) aspectsYes in "squiggles" intramuscle fiberYes, in NFTs intraneuronCongophilia associated with PHFsYes, squigglesYes, NFTsPHFs containPhosphorylated tauYesYesUbiquitinYesYesApo EYesYesPresenelin-1YesYesERKYesYesCDK5YesYesRNAYesYesMarkers of oxidative stressYes?A␤NoNo

