Common structure and toxic function of amyloid oligomers implies a common mechanism of pathogenesis

Recent findings indicate that soluble amyloid oligomers may represent the primary pathologic species in degenerative diseases. These amyloid oligomers share common structural features and the ability to permeabilize membranes, suggesting that they also share a common primary mechanism of pathogenesis. Membrane permeabilization by amyloid oligomers may initiate a common group of downstream pathologic processes, including intracellular calcium dyshomeostasis, production of reactive oxygen species, altered signaling pathways, and mitochondrial dysfunction that represent key effectors of cellular dysfunction and cell death in amyloid-associated degenerative disease, such as sporadic inclusion-body myositis.

The accumulation of insoluble, misfolded proteins is increasingly recognized as a key pathogenic feature of degenerative diseases, including Alzheimer disease (AD), Parkinson disease (PD), Huntington disease (HD), type II diabetes, and sporadic inclusion-body myositis. In most of these diseases, the end-stage products that accumulate are amyloid fibers. Amyloids have been defined in a number of different ways: operationally in terms of their ability to bind dyes, like Congo red and thioflavin dyes, morphologically as 6-to 10-nm filaments, and structurally as "cross ␤" fibrils by x-ray diffraction. Regardless of their protein sequences, many amyloids fit these definitions. Structural characterization and biochemical analysis of the fibril assembly pathways indicates that many amyloids share a common structural motif and aggregation pathway involving soluble oligomers that are an intermediate in fibril formation. For the purposes of this review, we will use the term amyloid to refer to aggregated, nonnative, extended ␤-structures that have the ability to propagate indefinitely. This definition includes the oligomeric intermediates that might not satisfy the more stringent definition. Accumulating evidence indicates that these soluble oligomeric intermediates may represent the primary pathologic species in disease. Recent evidence suggests that amyloid oligomers have a common structure, suggesting that they all may share a common primary mechanism of pathogenesis.

Evidence for a causal role of amyloids in pathogenesis and against a role of amyloid deposit accumulation. Although amyloids are commonly associated with degenerative diseases, the role of amyloid in disease pathogenesis is not established and remains controversial. The genetics of familial forms of degenerative diseases provides strong support for the notion that amyloids lie somewhere in the causal chain of pathogenesis. Mutations occur within the precursor proteins for the amyloid that accumulates in Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and Frontotemporal dementia. 1 These mutations are typically associated with early onset forms of the disease that are otherwise identical to the more common sporadic, late onset forms of disease. Moreover, the diseases are typically inherited in a dominant fashion suggesting that the mutation is associated with a pathogenic gain of function, rather than a loss of function. In Huntington's disease, pathogenesis is associated with the inheritance of an allele of the Huntingtin gene containing an expanded polyglutamine repeat. 2 Disease is also highly correlated with the propensity of the expanded polyglutamine repeat to aggregate. The tight linkage between inheritance of a mutant allele and early onset disease is strong evidence that the mutant protein exerts its effect in the causal chain of disease pathogenesis. Moreover, the close association between the aggregation properties and disease indicates that protein aggregation is important for pathogenesis.

Even though there is compelling evidence for a causal role of amyloid forming proteins in disease, there is also evidence that indicates that the accumulation of large intracellular and extracellular aggregates is not directly associated with pathogenesis. It has long been known that the extent of amyloid plaque accumulation does not correlate well with AD pathogenesis 3 and that a significant number of nondemented individuals have impressive amounts of amyloid plaques. In transgenic animals and cell culture models, pathologic changes are frequently observed prior to the onset of amyloid deposit accumulation.

These seemingly conflicting lines of evidence can be reconciled by postulating that amyloid oligomers, rather than the mature fibrils represent the primary toxic species in amyloid-associated degenerative disease. There is considerable evidence to support this supposition. In AD, soluble A␤ correlates better with dementia than insoluble, fibrillar deposits. 4,5 In some transgenic mouse models of AD, neurologic deficits precede the deposition of significant amounts of A␤, suggesting that the onset of pathology occurs prior to amyloid fibril deposition. 6,7 Common pathways of aggregation. Aggregation of amyloids requires the misfolding of native protein structure to acquire a structure that is capable of intermolecular bonding to form aggregates consisting of extended strands. The simplest possibility is that the structure of the aggregates would also consist of parallel strands in exact register, because this is the same general organization of the peptide within amyloid fibrils and this structure would not require any fundamental structural reorganization during fibril formation. Aggregates ranging from dimers up to particles of 1,000,000 Da or greater have been reported. [8][9][10][11][12][13] Electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy have identified spherical particles of approximately 3 to 10 nm that appear at early times of incubation and disappear as mature fibrils appear. [13][14][15] These spherical oligomers appear to represent intermediates in the pathway of fibril formation, but it is not yet clear whether they coalesce directly to form fibrils or whether they buffer monomer concentration. These soluble intermediates have been referred to as amorphous aggregates, micelles, protofibrils, prefibrillar aggregates, and ADDLs. 10,12,13,[16][17][18] At longer aggregation times, curvilinear fibers form that have a beaded appearance. These structures have also been called "protofibrils" because they appear to be formed by the coalescence of the spherical subunits. 13 This same spectrum of aggregation intermediates and morphologies have been observed for many types of amyloids, such as alpha synuclein, 19 islet amyloid, 20 and nondisease associated "neoamyloids." 18 Finally, these structures either anneal or undergo a conformational change to form mature 6-to 10-nm "cross ␤" fibrils that have either a smooth or twisted morphology. 13,21 Once the amyloid fibril lattice has been established, it can grow by the addition of monomer onto the ends of the fibrils [22][23][24][25] or by capture of preformed oligomeric intermediates at fibrils ends. 26 Common structure of amyloid fibrils and oligomers. The ability to form amyloids is not limited to disease-related proteins. 27 Rather, it appears to be a fundamental polymer motif of the polypeptide backbone, although it is not commonly observed in native proteins. The observation that a number of different protein sequences form "cross ␤" amyloid fibers indicates that specific sequences or side chain interactions are not required for amyloid formation and that the amyloid "cross ␤" lattice can accommodate a large number of sequence variation. 28 Amyloid fibrils have a number of common properties that may be a reflection of their underlying common structure. Amyloid fibrils have a "cross beta" structure, which indicates that the backbone hydrogen bonding is parallel to the fibril axis. 29,30 Amyloid fibrils represent a generic, intermolecular hydrogen bonded structural motif that is apparently not represented in native protein structures. Spectroscopic structural analysis of several different amyloids indicates that the polypeptide is commonly arranged as parallel beta strands in a sheet where the amino acid sequence is in exact register. [31][32][33][34][35][36][37] The findings that several major disease-related fibril structures are parallel and in exact register suggest that this may represent a common structural motif for other amyloids as well. A recent report indicates that the smooth and twisted morphologies represent subtle underlying structural difference and that they can be "inherited" by fibrils grown from a solution of monomer seeded by fibril lattices of either type. 38 This propagation of minor structural variants has been suggested to underlie the strain behavior observed in prion diseases. Although these various aggregates have been observed for many different types of amyloids, the relationships of the aggregation intermediates, their roles in fibril growth, and their contributions to disease pathogenesis are only now being clarified.

The idea that amyloid oligomers represent the primary toxic species of amyloids rather than the mature fibrils arose as a consequence of the inadequacy of fibril accumulation to account for pathogenesis as noted above. A number of studies provided evidence that A␤ oligomers are, in fact, more toxic to cells than mature fibrils. [39][40][41] Increasing evidence indicates that soluble amyloid oligomers are generally toxic for a wide variety of disease related amyloids 42 and indeed soluble oligomers are generically toxic because oligomers formed by proteins that are not diseaserelated are equally toxic as disease-related oligomers. 18 The idea that soluble A␤ oligomers are the primary toxic species is an attractive explanation that can reconcile the seemingly inconsistent evidence that amyloids are causally related to disease, whereas the large fibrillar aggregates are not. However, the evidence in support of this hypothesis is largely correlative and derived from in vitro studies.

It is difficult to directly assess the role of soluble oligomers in disease pathogenesis in vivo because the oligomers only differ from the native protein, soluble monomer, and mature fibrils in the conformation or aggregation state. To study these differences in vivo, we would need some way of distinguishing these conformation and aggregation differences. A conformation-dependent antibody that distinguishes between the different forms would be very useful. We produced a conformation-dependent antibody that is specific for soluble oligomers and does not recognize natively folded proteins, monomer, or fibrils. 43 Surprisingly, this antibody also recognizes soluble oligomers from a wide variety of amyloid-forming peptides and proteins equally well. 43 This suggests that the antibody recognizes a peptide backbone epitope that is common to amyloid oligomers of different sequences and is independent of the aminoacid side chains. An interesting possibility is that the anti-oligomer antibody recognizes a unique "alpha extended chain" pleated sheet structure. This has been suggested by Valerie Daggett and coworkers based on molecular dynamics simulations that suggest soluble oligomers may preferentially form alpha-sheet aggregates. 44,45 The "alpha sheet" was the first extended chain hydrogen bonding motif proposed by Pauling and Corey. 46 In this structure, the peptide carbonyls are all oriented isotropically with the amides pointing in the opposite direction. The alpha-sheet structure is also interesting because it can convert from beta-sheet structure by the sequential transition of individual peptide backbone angles with only minor change in the orientation of the side chains. 45 This proposed structure fell out of favor as structural analysis showed that virtually all extended structures are beta sheets, but it is intriguing to speculate that the reason that extensive alpha sheet structures is not represented in the protein structure data are because they are common to toxic amyloids and evolution has selected against them so that they only occur in disease states.

The recent availability of an antibody that can specifically recognize the soluble oligomeric state and distinguish it from the native conformation, random coil monomer, and fibrillar states facilitates an examination of the localization of oligomers in disease and in cellular and animal models of pathogenesis. It also provides a facile tool for quantifying oligomer formation and identifying the presence of amyloid oligomers in diseases that are not known to be amyloid associated. The anti-oligomer antibody detects a unique subset of amyloid deposits in AD brain, but not nondemented, control brain and the oligomeric deposits do not co localize thioflavin-S positive fibrillar amyloid plaques. 43 The staining is predominantly extracellular and does not appear to be preferentially localized with any cell type. It remains to be established whether their presence is a good predictor of disease onset or progression.

Common mechanism of amyloid oligomer toxicity and disease pathogenesis. The anti-oligomer antibody also blocks the toxicity of all types of soluble oligomers in vitro. 43 Because amyloid oligomers share a common structure and they are all intrinsically toxic to cells, this suggests that they also share a common mechanism of toxicity. If soluble oligomers have a common mechanism of toxicity, it implies that they act on the same primary target. This fundamental unity restricts number of potential targets to ones that are plausible of all of the different types of soluble amyloid oligomers. Additionally, some amyloids are cytosolic, whereas others are lumenal or extracellular, suggesting that the target of oligomers must be accessible to both compartments. The obvious target that satisfies this criterion is the plasma membrane, because it forms the interface between the two compartments.

Amyloid oligomers-such as A␤, alpha synuclein, and IAPP-have been widely reported to permeabilize membranes. 42,47 Amyloid oligomers specifically increase lipid bilayer conductance regardless of the sequence, whereas fibrils and soluble low molecular weight species have no observable effect. 48,49 We found that this increase in membrane conductance is not ion selective and is not due to discrete pore or channel formation. Atomic force microscope images of oligomer-treated membranes are consistent with the interpretation that oligomers permeabilize membranes without forming discrete pores. 50 The membrane permeabilizing activity is reversible and can be inhibited by anti-oligomer antibody. 49 Amyloid oligomers have also been reported to permeabilize cell membranes. 48,51 Addition of oligomers to cell cultures causes a rapid and large increase in cytosolic free [Ca2ϩ], whereas equivalent amounts of soluble monomer and fibrils have no detectable effect. Moreover, all types of oligomers specifically permeabilize cell membranes. The Ca2ϩ influx is not blocked by cobalt, indicating that the effect is not due to activation of existing Ca2ϩ channels. Amyloid oligomers also caused the leakage of the membrane impermeant dye calcein from cells, indicating that a variety of molecules diffuse across the membrane after oligomer treatment. This is in good agreement with previous reports of oligomer induced release of dye from phospholipid vesicles. 15,20,52,53 We also observed that oligomer treatment of cells results in an increase in cytosolic Ca2ϩ in Ca2ϩ-free medium and that this increase can be largely eliminated by pretreatment with thapsigargin to deplete endoplasmic reticulum calcium. 51 This suggests that external application of oligomers leads to liberation of Ca2ϩ from intracellular stores. This is consistent with reports that oligomers may subsequently penetrate into cells where they similarly disrupt intracellular membranes to cause leakage of sequestered Ca2ϩ, but it could also result as a consequence of altered intracellular signaling. 48 Even though soluble oligomers may not be acutely toxic in vivo as they are in vitro, the chronic leakage of ions across the plasma membrane may be sufficient to disrupt normal neuronal function and serve as a source of chronic stress in maintaining a normal membrane potential.

Implications for therapeutic development.

Understanding the primary mechanism of pathogen-esis has significant implications for therapeutic development because it facilitates the development of drugs that get to the heart of the disease. Targeting downstream pathways may only provide partial palliative relief if there are multiple parallel pathways. If membrane permeabilization is the common, primary mechanism of amyloid oligomer pathogenesis, targeting it may prove challenging if this permeabilization does not involve the formation of a specific channel or pore. Drugs or agents that inhibit oligomer formation, prevent their interaction with membranes, or neutralize their toxicity may also be useful therapeutics. Vaccination against the generic amyloid oligomer epitope may be a promising strategy, because the resulting antibodies are specific for disease-related and do not recognize normal proteins and the antibodies neutralize the toxicity of amyloid oligomers. If this vaccination approach is successful, it may have the added advantage of representing a broad spectrum "silver bullet" for multiple amyloidrelated degenerative diseases, because it targets a generic peptide-chain structure that amyloid oligomers have in common.

