A perspective on sporadic inclusion-body myositis The role of aging and inflammatory processes

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (sIBM) is an age-related condition manifested after midlife. This review points out salient features of sIBM that are shared with normal aging in muscle and with inflammatory changes in vascular atheromas and senile plaques of Alzheimer disease (AD). The amyloid precursor protein (APP) and derived Abeta peptides are found in both AD and sIBM. Because transgenic expression of human APP induces sIBM like changes, it is of potential interest that an inducer of APP, IL-1, increases during aging in mouse muscle. Because various subsets of the usual aging changes in aging brain, muscle, and vessels can be attenuated in rodents by caloric intake and possibly in humans by drugs with anti-inflammatory and anticoagulant activities, this study suggests that diet and inflammation may be useful experimental variations in exploring the pathogenesis of sIBM.

This brief review from a biogerontologist's perspective considers relationships between sporadic inclusion-body myositis (sIBM) and aging to further develop this important suggestion of Askanas and Engel 1 (see also the article by Engel and Askanas 1a in this issue). sIBM is considered the most common myopathy after age 50 years. 1,2 The hallmark of sIBM is the unexplained, slowly progressive muscle weakness in association with muscle fiber atrophy and vacuolation. 1,3,4 Inflammatory processes are present with consistent increase in the expression of IL-1beta and variable invasion of macrophages and T-cells. A potentially important variation is that the rare hereditary IBM (hIBM) cases show much less inflammation than in sIBM. 5 Both types of IBM show cytochrome oxidase-negative (COX) fibers containing mutant mitochondria with various mtDNA deletions: hIBM 5 and sIBM. 6,7 Several major chronic diseases of aging are proving to share subsets of inflammatory processes that, to varying degrees, are also found in the same tis-sues in the absence of specific pathologic lesions, as discussed below. Shared inflammatory components, for example, arise in Alzheimer disease (AD) and vascular disease (VascD) (table 1; see also article by Murphy and Golde 7a in this issue). To some extent, the characteristic inflammatory changes in AD are intensifications of inflammatory changes that arise during normal aging in the absence of neurodegenerative disease (table 2). Because sIBM also includes inflammatory processes to varying degrees (see articles by Dalakas 7b and Steinman 7c in this issue), it is pertinent to consider the normal aging changes in skeletal muscle which include some markers of inflammation and oxidative stress (see article by Moreira 7d in this issue). Of course, cause and effect are hard to resolve (table 3).

IBM shares certain important features with AD, particularly the accumulations of the amyloid betapeptide (Abeta) and the amyloid precursor protein (APP) (see articles by Vetrive, 7e Murphy and Golde, 7a and Glabe and Kayed 7f in this issue). Note an important difference: in AD brains the Abeta accumulations are extracellular, whereas in sIBM Abeta is intracellular, within muscle fibers and there is no conspicuous extracellular Abeta depot. Transgenic overexpression of APP in vivo and in vitro gives valuable models for the key features of sIBM, with IM deposits of Abeta and phosphorylated tau. [8][9][10] In addition, both AD and sIBM accumulate frameshifted ubiquitin (UBB ϩ 1) 11 ; in sIBM, the location of the UBB ϩ 1 is intracellular, whereas in AD brains the UBB ϩ 1 is intraneuronal in dystrophic neurites and extracellular in senile plaques 12 (see article by van Leeuwen 12a in this issue).

It may give insights to compare sIBM with AD and VascD. Although the incidence and prevalence by age are unknown, it is thought that sIBM incidence increases at later ages. 1 Table 2 approximates the age-related increase of sIBM prevalence, which may arise about 10 years before clinical symptoms of sporadic AD reach 1% prevalence in the population. Clinical VascD may reach a prevalence of 1% about 10 years before sIBM, such that patients Յ 40 years comprise 2% to 6% of the reported cases of acute myocardial infarction. 13 What about preclinical stages? VascD is now widely thought to begin even before birth, with the presence of minute vascular lesions in fetal aortas that grow progressively even during childhood. 14,15 The earliest AD changes that may be presymptom-atic arise in apoE4 carriers. ApoE4 is the most important genetic risk factor for AD, particularly in Caucasian and north Asian-derived populations (see article by Huang 15a in this issue). Importantly, apoE4 effects are not fully penetrant, because some E4/E4 homozygotes appear to reach advanced decades yet with intact cognition. By age 30 to 40 years, some apoE4 carriers have lower brain glucose metabolism, 16,17 which may indicate the presence of emerging or congenital neuronal impairments, 20 or more years ahead of clinical disease. The apoE4 allele is proinflammatory in three situations: in vitro, apoE4 promotes the activation of complement by Abeta, 18 whereas apoE3 but not E4 blocked the activation of brain macrophages by sAPP beta. 19 After bypass surgery, apoE4 carriers had higher elevations of TNFalpha and IL-8. 20 In mice with targeted replacement of apoE with the human alleles, E4 transgenic carriers had grater inflammatory responses. [21][22][23] This proinflammatory activity may give a basis for interaction of the apoE genotype with the outcomes of sIBM, as discussed further below.

In AD, neurofibrillary changes increase exponentially at later decades 24,25 ; the onset of NFT changes is speculated to be during adolescence. 26 In the preclinical stages (CDR 0.5), nonfibrillar Abeta peptide (not an amyloid) is detected within neurons. 27 Askanas and Engel 1 have suggested that accumulations of phosphorylated tau and Abeta are important steps in AD etiology that may be shared with sIBM. In particular, accumulations of APP and Abeta in muscle during sIBM appear to precede other abnormalities. Although apoE4 has not shown associations with sIBM, it remains possible that apoE alleles influence its course. For sIBM, the author cannot find discussion of preclinical stages. However, muscle fiber mitochondrial DNA deletions are clearly present in the general aging population, as discussed in more detail below.

It is not a digression to review some key points about APP and Abeta. The evolution of Abeta has enabled the robust transgenic models of IBM with human APP, because the rodent Abeta sequence differs from that of most vertebrates in three substitutions, denoted as human[residue number]rat, that reduce its aggregation: Arg [5]Gly, Tyr [10]Phenylal, Hist [13]Arg. 28,29 Rat and mouse Abeta spontaneously aggregate into fibrils less avidly and lack the capacity to reduce Cu 2ϩ . 29 Nonetheless, rodent Abeta can aggregate into soluble forms, possibly like the oligomers formed by human Abeta 30 which cause stress and oxidative damage to cultured E18 neurons. Although dose-responses were not characterized, it appears that rat Abeta aggregates are less toxic. 29 This major difference in human and rodent Abeta aggregability has enabled the success of human transgenic Abeta, mutant and wild type, in rodent models. An open question in sIBM transgenic is the role of soluble toxic Abeta forms and hybrid human-rodent Abeta structures (see article by Glabe and Kayed 7f in this issue). The evolutionary depth of the toxic Abeta sequence is remarkable, extending at least 300 million years back into the paleozoic vertebrate stem lines: fish 31,32 and the great apes and humans 33 have functionally equivalent Abeta sequences. Although aging rodent brains do show some accumulation of their endogenous Abeta sequence during aging, the increases are modest and no amyloid fibrils are formed. 34,35 On this basis, the author suggests that sIBM will be less common in wild type aging rodents than humans, whereas aging primates should also show sIBM because of their similar APP sequence to humans.

The functions of APP and Abeta are not known, despite their presence at some level in cell throughout the body. There is ongoing discussion about the role of APP in normal brain memory processes. In normal muscle, APP is constitutively expressed, such as in mouse and human neuromuscular junction and in myoblasts. 36,37 Intracellular APP may have roles as serine protease inhibitors from the Kunitz-motif in the APP which occurs widely in mammalian APP (see article by Engel and Askanas 1a in this issue).

A large and growing literature describes interactions of APP with apoptosis. APP is rapidly induced in response to injury and stress in a wide variety of cells. In the chloroquine rat myopathy model (not a model of IBM), Abeta was increased during formation of the abnormal snake-coiled myofibers. 38 In lymphoblastoid cultures from humans, the induction of APP mRNA by heat shock treatment followed induction of HSP70 mRNA. 39 Neurons are the cell type best characterized for stress-induced APP. 39,40 In evolutionary terms, APP may be a candidate for antagonistic pleiotropy, as a gene with some advantages during early life or in response to acute stress, with delayed adverse consequences. Because APP induction is a general cellular response to injury and stress, 41 one may consider the possibility that in sIBM the induction of APP is secondary to a prior cell-stress state, such as mtDNA deletions or the induction of IL-1, as discussed next.

Several muscle changes of normal aging are pertinent to sIBM. The most obvious is the progressive increase of mtDNA deletions in aging skeletal muscle and cardiac muscle, which are localized to COXnegative fibers [42][43][44] (see article by Oldfors 44a in this issue). Thus, aging skeletal muscle becomes a mosaic of fibers with a spectrum of mtDNA deletions. 45 Because similar COX-negative fibers with mtDNA deletions are also a hallmark of sIBM, the author suggests the hypothesis that sIBM arises in such COX-negative fibers.

Gene expression age changes in normal skeletal muscle are also cogent to sIBM. According to one study (perhaps the only) of muscle cytokines and normal aging, the aging mouse shows threefold increases of IL-1beta expression (2 vs 24 months, female C57BL/6 mice), assayed by ELISA in muscle lysates (the muscle was not specified); 46 IL-1beta immunoreactivity was detected diffusely in myocytes (data not shown). If verified, these findings are of much importance of the prominent elevations of IL-1 within the lesions of sIBM. The APP mRNA showed minor, non-significant increases in extracts of gastrocnemius muscle from 2-year-old mice (Tom Prolla and Jim Vann, personal communication, University of Wisconsin).

Dalakas 4 has hypothesized that IL-1 in sIBM drives the expression of APP, which extends the hypothesis of Griffin and colleagues, 47,48 who first proposed for AD that IL-1 induces APP in brain cells (see article by Dalakas 7b in this issue). Drawing on these concepts, the author suggests that mtDNA deletions could be the initiating event, with subsequent cell stress that induces IL-1 and APP in a feedforward cascade. Although average muscle APP did not increase with aging, it would still be worth a look at APP expression at a cell level by immunohistochemistry or in situ hybridization, because larger increases might be found in damaged fibers, especially those with mtDNA deletions. Aging mice may not be as prone to sIBM as humans because rodent Abeta is less amyloidogenic and cytotoxic as noted above.

Several other aging changes also map into sIBM pathogenesis. The aging mouse gastrocnemius (5 vs 30 months C57BL/6 male) shows two-to fourfold decreases of mRNAs for several enzymes of protein catabolism: mitochondrial LON protease, ubiquitin thiolesterase, and ubiquitin specific protease. 49 If the protein activities are also decreased, these changes could enable the increase of UBB ϩ 1 in sIBM (see article by van Leeuwen 12a in this issue). Genes showing increased expression include the two to fourfold increase of Hsp 27 and Hsp 71; SAA isoform 4; and PPRgamma. Hsp27 is significant because it binds actin. In aging heart of sedentary mice, several inflammatory genes are increased (complement C1q; TNF receptor6, and apoE. 50 Aging human muscle (vasa lateralis) also shows increase of HSP27. 51 IL-6 also increased in aging mouse muscle. 52 Each of these changes could be relevant to the milieu of aging which enables sIBM and its local inflammatory processes.

IL-1 and IL-6 also increase in other tissues during aging. [52][53][54][55] For example, we observed increased IL-6 in mRNA and protein in aging rat glia at baseline (no stimulation; figure); although IL-1 expression was not different in unstimulated glia, stimulation by LPS (endotoxin) increased IL-1 and IL-6 expression more in old glia. 53 Blood levels of these cytokines also increase markedly during aging in human populations, in association with sub-populations experiencing poor health from heart disease and other causes as described for IL-1 56,57 and particularly for IL-6. 58 The "inflammatory burden" is being recognized as a general indicator of function and future risk of morbidity. [59][60][61][62] A remarkable and unexpected generalization may be at hand: anti-inflammatory drugs and statins give general protection against chronic diseases of aging. It is now widely accepted that vascular disease, either first event or recurrence, is lowered 30% to 50% by aspirin and statins. Moreover, several cancers are similarly decreased by NSAIDs (colorectal and esophageal), and there may be a benefit of aspirin and statins to risk of breast cancer. The possibility of benefits to AD from NSAIDs, aspirin, and statins is under intense study. [63][64][65][66][67] The impact of these widely used drugs may be influenced by the apoE genotype, because apoE4 allele is proinflammatory as noted above.

Caloric restriction is another anti-inflammatory paradigm 68 that may be useful experimental manipulations in the transgenic sIBM models. Caloric restriction attenuates mtDNA deletions and muscle fiber loss in rodent models. 69 The mechanism may be to lower blood glucose, because mtDNA deletions in skeletal muscle are accelerated by chronic hyperglycemia in humans in proportion to the duration of diabetes 70,71 and in rodent smooth muscle. 72 Caloric restriction also increases expression of genes for freeradical scavenging in muscle mitochondria. 73 Because these same variations also influence the amount of 8-hydroxyguanosine (8-OHG) in mtDNA, it is hypothesized that blood glucose influences the rate of mtDNA oxidation. 72,74 Besides COX-negative fibrils and 8-OHG, caloric restriction also attenuates markers of oxidative stress in aging muscle and other tissues (see articles by Buxbaum, 74a Davies and Shrinagpure, 74b and Moriera et al. 7d in this issue).

The author concludes with several suggestions for future studies on sIBM based on this brief review:

1. Close examination of the overlap between normal aging changes in muscle and the characteristics of sIBM, particularly mtDNA deletions and COXnegative fibrils and the expression of IL-1 and APP. Herein may be found the 'age milieu' for sIBM. 1 It might be predicted that earliest stages of sIBM arise in COX-negative muscle fibers and that APP inductions are subsequent, because of evidence that elevated IL-1beta induces APP. 2. In sIBM, transgenics define the role of soluble toxic Abeta forms and hybrid human-rodent Abeta structures. 3. The influence of blood glucose levels on the onset and progression of sIBM in transgenic APP models, in vivo and in vitro. 4. Relationship of sIBM to other inflammatory processes and diseases of aging. 5. The influence of salicylate, NSAIDs and statins on models of sIBM and in human populations. 6. The influence of apoE4 alleles on the inflammatory aspects of sIBM in human patients and in apoE allele targeted replacement mice. 7. Comparative studies on sIBM with aging, which should be rare in rodents because of their divergent APP sequence, but like humans in primates because of their similar APP sequence.  53 

Acknowledgment

The author thanks Valarie Askanas and W. King Engel for the enlightening discussions on the potential significance of sIBM in aging and its shared traits with AD.

Supported by the Alzheimer's Association, by the John Douglas French Alzheimer's Foundation, and by the National Institute on Aging (AG13499). Disclosure: The author is co-founder and major stockholder of Acumen Pharmaceuticals, which develops therapies for Alzheimer disease. The author reports no conflicts of interest.

Figure ..Figure.Aging increases expression of IL-6 in rat mixed glial cultures. IL-6 expression in rat primary mixed glial cultures from 3-month-old (young) or 24-month-old (old) male rat brain regions, expressed as ratio of old/young. IL-6 protein, left bars; IL-6 mRNA, right bars. Cx ϭ cortex; Hc ϭ hippocampus; St ϭ striatum. Adapted from Xie et al.53 

Table 11Shared inflammatory mechanismsAtheromaSenile plaqueIBMCellsMacrophages (CD68)ϩϩϩϩϩϩ/ϪT helper (Th1)-cellsϩϩ0ϩ/ϪMast cells, plateletsϩϩ0?Neovascularizationϩϩϩ?ProteinsAmyloid Abeta/APPϩϩ APPϩϩϩϩϩϩC-reactive proteinϩϩϩ?Serum amyloid Pϩϩϩϩ?Clotting factorsϩϩ0?Complement: C3, C5b-9ϩϩϩϩ?Cytokines: IL-1ϩϩ ϩϩ ϩReferences 1,3,75,76.

Table 22Inflammatory markers in Alzheimer disease and usual brain agingSenileAgingAgingplaquehumanrodentGlial activation astrocytes;ϩϩϩϩmicroglia-monocytes␣1-antichymotrypsinϩ␣2-macroglobulinapoE, apoJϩϩϩϩComplement C1q, C3ϩCorpora amylaceaeϩIL-1, Il-6, TNF-␣ϩ ϩϩϩReferences 75,77.

Table 33Schedules of chronic diseases of aging0 -10 years10 -30 years30 -50 years50 -70 yearsϾ70 yearsVascular plaquesϩϩϩϩϩϩϩϩϩϩAlzheimer amyloid0?ϩ (apoE4)ϩϩϩϩϩsIBM??ϩϩ ?

