Treatment and prevention of the amyloidoses Can the lessons learned be applied to sporadic inclusion-body myositis?

The amyloid fibril represents a final common pathologic pathway for a variety of human proteins, all of which have a propensity to misfold. Each seems to require a predisposing event to realize its fibrillogenic potential. It may be mutation, inappropriate or incomplete cleavage, overproduction, or the availability of a template for misfolding. Therapies have been based on decreasing the stimulus (inflammation in the case of AA) reducing the number of producing cells (AL) and a variety of approaches to removing the extracellular aggregates. Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (sIBM), while physically resembling the extracellular amyloidoses, is an intracellular disease, hence imposes the additional requirement of developing a therapy that can access and function inside the affected or potentially affected, cell. Current approaches to the treatment of other forms of amyloidosis are discussed in the context of their applicability, or lack thereof, to sIBM.

The amyloidoses are a subset of the broader group of diseases caused by misfolded proteins. In contrast to those conditions where the conformational changes result in a loss of function (e.g., CFTR in cystic fibrosis, glucocerebrosidase in Gaucher disease, etc.) this class of disorders results from a gain of pathologic function in which the responsible molecules become insoluble under physiologic conditions and compromise the tissues at the site of deposition. 1 Historically most of these have been extracellular disorders characterized pathologically by homogenous eosinophilic staining with hematoxylin and eosin, binding of Congo red with positive birefringence under polarized light, binding of the dyes thioflavine S and T and a fibrillar ultrastructure when examined by electron microscopy. 2 Other disorders characterized by intracellular inclusions, such as Parkinson disease (PD) and Huntington disease, have not generally shown Congophilia, although study of the responsible proteins (as well as many other proteins and protein fragments, currently not known to be associated with disease) as recombinantly produced molecules in vitro has indicated that they may also display the same tinctorial and ultrastructural features when incubated under the appropriate conditions at sufficiently high concentrations. 3 To date, the only circumstances under which Congo red staining of intracellular structures has been consistently documented have been the paired helical filaments in Alzheimer disease (AD) and the inclusions of sporadic inclusion-body myositis (sIBM). 4 Twenty-four different proteins have been shown to be responsible for the human and animal amyloidoses in vivo. 5 The processes involved in the aggregation of many of them have been studied in detail in vitro. 6 In each case the immediate precursor of the aggregate is a misfolded monomer; however, these precursors are generated via a variety of pathways (figure). In some they are released from a stable tetramer such as in the case of transthyretin. In a similar, although not identical, fashion immunoglobulin L-chains produced in excess of their H-chain binding partner may misfold, with or without synthetic or post-synthetic enzymatic truncation. In the instance of the amyloid A protein, its precursorserum amyloid A, an apolipoprotein-is overproduced in response to inflammation and, in some individuals, is incompletely degraded to a 7500 or less dalton molecule that misfolds and deposits. 7 Specific proteolytic cleavage plays a role in the generation of the A␤ 1-40 and 1-42 that are the immediate misfolded precursors of the oligomers and fibrils involved in the pathogenesis of AD. 8 In other circumstances, notably those responsible for the prionopathies and the islet amyloid precursor polypeptide induced pancreatic ␤-cell death in the course of type II diabetes mellitus, the precursors appear to need no processing, only apparently templated misfolding. 9 Hence there are many ways to achieve the insoluble fibrillar state in vivo.

Although the various proteins share no primary sequence, the final aggregation products, the deposited fibrils, are conformationally similar or identical at least as judged by the ability of all to bind or codeposit with a set of accessory molecules including the serum proteins serum amyloid P-component (SAP) and apolipoprotein E and the proteoglycan perlecan. [10][11][12] Some attempts at therapy have focused on these commonalities, assuming that they represent the therapeutic soft underbelly of the entire process of amyloidogenesis.

Amyloidosis secondary to infectious or noninfectious inflammatory disease is the most common sys-temic amyloidosis worldwide. The precursor, serum amyloid A, is produced in the liver under the influence of interleukin 6 (IL-6) secondary to the inflammatory process and mediated by increases in interleukin 1 (IL-1) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF). 13 Prolonged high elevation of these cytokines in individuals bearing particular alleles of the genes encoding the SAA protein seems to be required for fibrillar deposition, usually in the kidneys, liver, and spleen. The major morbidity and mortality is related to the renal disease, if not to the primary inflammatory process. Therapy or prevention of the AA amyloidosis is possible by either aborting the inflammatory process or curing the infection.

Familial Mediterranean fever, related to mutations in the pyrin gene, has a high frequency of renal amyloidosis in carriers of the SAA allele SAA1 ␣/␣. 14 Administration of regular doses of colchicine prevents the inflammatory epidodes and the eventual occurrence of amyloid deposition. 15 The colchicine effect does not appear to be mediated by its capacity to disaggregate microtubules and it does not work in other forms of amyloidosis. In a similar manner, effective therapy of rheumatoid arthritis and some of the other inflammatory disorders by cytokine inhibitors or receptor antagonists has resulted in the resolution of the deposits. 16 Successful antibiotic therapy of chronic infections can also be associated with resolution of the accompanying amyloid deposits, however complete recovery may not be the rule. There are current clinical trials using anionic sulfonates (Fibrillex, Neurochem) in AA amyloidosis. 17 The results of these trials should be known within the next year. The intracellular disposition of the A␤ material in inclusion-body myositis and the lack, thus far, of demonstrable perlecan associated with the inclusions makes this approach unlikely to be successful in sIBM; however, it is unclear from the literature whether codeposition of serum amyloid P-component, perlecan, or other proteoglycans has been sufficiently investigated to determine if they have a role in this disorder.

The most common systemic amyloidosis in the U.S. is that related to Ig L-chain deposition. It has been viewed and treated as a monoclonal B-cell proliferative neoplasm since the late 1970s using the same chemotherapy regimens as developed for the more malignant multiple myeloma. 18 Treatments for the latter disorder have become increasingly aggressive with high intensity chemotherapy and the inclusion of stem cell support. As their efficacy has become clear, they have been adapted for the less proliferative AL disorder. Current reports suggest that under certain circumstances this approach is effective; however, patients with cardiac involvement do not do well with these regimens and a true controlled trial has not yet been instituted. 19,20 These strategies, as with any malignancy, eliminate the culprit clone. There are no data suggesting that sIBM is a clonal disorder deserving of full bore antineoplastic treatment. Even therapeutic immunosup-

Figure. Amyloidogenesis. The groups I to IV represent prototype modes of fibrillogenesis typified by the examples indicated. In group I, represented by transthyretin, release from the tetramer and misfolding of the monomer results in an aggregating species. The rate of release and misfolding is accelerated to varying degrees by the particular mutation. Group II proteins (e.g., Ig L-chains and serum amyloid A) do not misfold until they are partially degraded. In both these cases the production of the precursor is increased (by either monoclonal expansion [AL] or in response to cytokines [AA]). It is hypothesized that the fragments represent incomplete degradation in the normal catabolic pathway. In the group III protein processing of the normal Alzheimer Beta Protein Precursor (A␤PP) is required to produce aggregation competent A␤ 1-40 and 1-42 .

Group IV molecules including the prion proteins and the islet amyloid protein precursor (IAPP) do not seem to undergo any processing to generate a sufficient concentration of misfolded peptide to oligomerize. It is not known if interaction with other molecules is required other than misfolded template in the case of the prionoses. Once the precursor is available oligomerization follows, in some cases (A␤, prion proteins among others) seeded, in others, notably TTR not seeded. Oligomers, fibrils, or both may be responsible for cell death. It is clear that in cell culture oligomers are the major toxic species; in vivo more data are necessary.

pression has not shown impressive benefits for IBM patients (see article by Dalakas in this volume).

During the investigative use of iodo-doxirubicin as an antineoplastic agent in myeloma, a patient with concomitant AL was noted to experience improvement in renal function and increased excretion of L-chains, with reduced AL deposits. 21 Similar experiences in a small number of patients led to a controlled trial, which ultimately showed no effect and significant toxicity when compared to controls. Nonetheless several studies have shown that the compound apparently intercalates into the fibril structure and causes dissolution of experimental amyloid in both the test tube and animals transgenic for human transthyretin, suggesting that the compound might be utilized in any of the extracellular amyloidoses. 22,23 Studies are underway to develop less toxic analogs. Such compounds, at an appropriate dose, might be useful in sIBM because they can enter cells and could favorably impact on the intracellular fibrillar structures. In this case, a compound with suspected activity for one class of fibrils seemed to have potential to be useful on the basis of its reactivity with a conformation shared by many fibrils.

The notion of utilizing a pathway common to all forms of amyloidogenesis was intentionally pursued by investigators interested in the role of the serum amyloid P-component. A small molecule SAP ligand found to interfere with the interaction of SAP with fibrils in vitro was found to lower the serum SAP concentration. A phase I study of the compound in 19 patients (12 AL, 2 ATTR, 1 AA, 1 AapoA1, 1 Afib) showed few side effects and mobilization of tissue SAP but little efficacy during the 1 to 10 month period of observation. 24 There have been no further data published since the original report. In the absence of documentation of SAP deposition in the sIBM aggregates, one would suspect that even if these compounds are successful in extracellular deposition they would not be effective in preventing or resolving the intracellular fibrillogenesis seen in sIBM. Thus it is important to determine if SAP is present in the intracellular aggregates.

The transthyretin (TTR) amyloidoses are an interesting group of diseases that encompass both autosomal dominant, relatively early onset disorders related to mutations in the protein (familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy and familial amyloidotic cardiomyopathy) as well as late onset sporadic disease (senile systemic amyloidosis) due to organcompromising deposition of the wild-type protein. 25 Interestingly there has been a single patient with sIBM whose inclusions contain both A␤ mutant and TTR (V122I). 26 The hereditary forms are perhaps the best and most widely applied example of successful, albeit crude, gene therapy in humans. Because most of the mutant protein is synthesized in the liver, removal of that organ eliminates the systemic precursor (although not the TTR synthesized in the eye or in the choroid plexus and leptomeninges). Approx-imately 700 patients with various mutations have undergone the procedure. 27 The results to date indicate that disease progression is arrested in approximately 60% of the patients, while 20% improve and 20% deteriorate. Individuals with the Val30Met mutation seem to do better than those with other substitutions. This is clearly heroic therapy after the fact and does not serve all the patients well. In addition there is no therapy for those suffering from deposition of the wild-type protein nor is there any available prophylaxis. Several laboratories have been investigating the use of small molecules that stabilize the circulating TTR tetramer, thereby reducing the amount of monomer available to misfold and many of the molecules appear to have the capacity to inhibit fibril formation in the test tube and the cytotoxicity produced by oligomers derived from TTR mutants in tissue culture. 28 Obviously these compounds are TTR-specific and have little relevance to sIBM in vivo unless the concurrent aggregation of mutant TTR and wild-type A␤ is more widespread than is presently believed.

The TTR disorders have also been a fertile ground for the application of molecular biologic techniques to the suppression of the mutant protein by hepatocytes or in transgenic animals. Single-stranded nucleotides and ribozymes have been utilized in various experimental systems. 29,30 The inherent fallacy in these approaches in the TTR disorders is the inability of the agent to enter every, or even a majority of, liver cells in the intact animal. Although it is formally possible that partial suppression may be effective therapeutically, at the moment that question has not been posed experimentally. The application of any of these molecular techniques to sIBM implies efficient delivery to at least the affected myocytes or delivery to all myocytes in the context of a promoter that would be upregulated only in the affected cells. Obviously if expression of the inhibitory molecules had no impact on normal myocyte function one could accept ubiquitous expression of the construct.

Clearly the human amyloid that is most relevant for sIBM is A␤, because sIBM represents an organismally less devastating form of deposition of this protein. Much of the therapy presently available for AD is post hoc, attempting to squeeze the most function out of the remaining cholinergic neurons by inhibiting the degradation of their neurotransmitter. Recently a variety of approaches have been directed at the process of fibril formation itself. Dr. Golde has discussed the epidemiologic studies supporting the use of various non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents and their activity in experimental animals elsewhere in this volume. Several peptide products have been shown to inhibit A␤ fibril formation in vitro and in animal models and are in various stages of clinical trials. Clearly should any of these show efficacy without toxicity their administration to patients with sIBM would be warranted.

The greatest excitement in the A␤ field was generated when transgenic animals bearing a human mu-tant A␤ were immunized with an A␤ peptide and showed resolution of their deposits. 31 A human trial was subsequently instituted but aborted when 10% of the participants showed evidence of inflammatory encephalitis. 32,33 Subsequent animal studies showed salutary effects of passive immunization in experimental animals without inflammation and resolution of deposits. Similar human studies are either planned or in progress. The notion of clearing of deposits by host immune mechanisms is attractive despite the already confirmed risk of "innocent bystander" type inflammation; however, the question of the role of the deposits in the actual pathogenesis of the disease is not clear. Most of the tissue culture and some of the animal studies suggest that the cytotoxic elements in the process of fibrillogenesis are the prefibrillar oligomers that are present well before protofibrils or fibrils are formed. 34 Hence it remains to be seen whether removal of fibrils will restore a degree of neuronal function sufficient to arrest the progressive dementia or allow recovery. Although the specificity of the anti-A␤ approach is attractive in the case of sIBM, it must be noted that the plaques in the transgenic mice are extracellular and the aggregates of sIBM are intracellular, imposing a requirement for the active principle to enter the myocyte. It is not clear that this will be the case. Nonetheless the antibody approach has received a great deal of attention. It is also possible that myocyte targeted DNA vaccination might be a better method of antibody-mediated clearance for the intracellular aggregates.

Passive anti-L-chain amyloid antibody has been tested in experimental animals with AL deposits. 35 These experiments and subsequent human trials will certainly yield insights into the question of what is truly the pathogenic amyloid species in these human disorders. In each of these cases the use of therapeutic immunization, active or passive, has been facilitated by the availability of an appropriate animal model. The availability of such a model for sIBM would certainly enhance studies of potential immunologic, molecular biologic or chemical therapeutics. Subsequent clinical trials would also be more feasible with both the identification of individuals at risk and laboratory surrogates for measuring therapeutic responses.

Supported by National Institutes of Health Grant 1R01 AG19259.

