Amyloidogenic processing of ␤-amyloid precursor protein in intracellular compartments

Trafficking and proteolytic processing of amyloid precursor protein (APP) have been the focus of numerous investigations in the past two decades, since the identification of A␤ as the principal component of brain senile plaques and the cloning of APP cDNA. Tremendous progress has been made in the recent past toward the characterization of ␤and ␥-secretases. Here, we review the salient features of Alzheimer disease amyloidogenesis, and discuss the current knowledge on APP trafficking and amyloidogenic processing of APP in intracellular membrane compartments and microdomains.

Alzheimer disease (AD) is the most common form of age-associated dementia. The characteristic and invariant lesions in brains of afflicted individuals include the accumulation of 38-to 43-amino-acid ␤-amyloid (A␤) peptides in senile plaques, and the presence of hyperphosphorylated tau in neurofibrillary tangles. Although the pathology of AD is complex, amyloid cascade hypothesis was proposed over a decade ago, suggesting that the accumulation of A␤ driven by increased generation of fibrillogenic A␤ over its clearance is the primary cause for the subsequent formation of senile plaque, neurofibrillary tangles, neuronal dysfunction, microglial cell activation, neuronal death, and clinical dementia in AD pathogenesis. 1 A␤ is generated by the sequential proteolytic processing of the type I membrane protein, termed amyloid precursor protein (APP), by ␤and ␥-secretases. 2,3 The longer A␤ peptides (A␤ 42 ), which represents about 10% of all A␤ species in the brain, have increased propensity to aggregate and accumulate as extracellular amyloid deposits in senile plaques and cerebral blood vessels. Over the years, evidence from biochemical, genetic, and pathologic investigations overwhelmingly support the idea that amyloidogenesis is a pivotal and early event in AD pathogenesis. Refinements of the original amyloid cascade hypothesis based on recent evidence include a principal role for soluble oligomeric A␤, which correlates with the onset of cognitive impairment/decline or disease symptomology much better than does the abundance of fibrillar A␤.

Major genetic susceptibility factors of amyloidogenesis.

Autosomal dominant inheritance of mutations in the APP, PSEN1, and PSEN2 genes localized in chromosomes 21, 14, and 1, respectively, are responsible for familial early-onset AD (FAD). 4 PSEN1 and PSEN2 encode for homologous polytopic membrane proteins, termed presenilin 1 and 2 (PS1 and PS2). To date, 18 missense mutations in APP, 142 in PS1 and 10 in PS2 have been reported to cause FAD (for details see: http://www.alzforum. org/res/com/mut/; http://www.molgen.ua.ac.be/ ADMutations/). FAD mutations in PSEN1 cause most aggressive forms of AD, in some cases with onset younger than 30 years. Individuals with trisomy 21 (Down syndrome) have an extra copy of the APP gene and develop AD pathology as early as 20 years of age. Even though FAD-linked mutations in APP account for less than 5% of total AD cases, these autosomal dominant mutations are highly penetrant and (with rare exceptions) the clinical and pathologic symptoms of individuals with FAD mutations are nearly identical to that of patients with late-onset sporadic AD. Biochemically, FAD-associated mutants in PSEN1 and PSEN2 lead to selective increase in the levels of A␤ 42 species, which readily aggregate in vitro and are the initial A␤ species deposited in the brains of individuals with AD and Down syndrome. 5 FAD-linked mutations in APP either increase A␤ 42 , overall A␤ production, or generate highly fibrillogenic A␤ variants. In addition to early-onset FAD mutations, it was also discovered that the presence of ε4 allele of APOE gene is a risk factor for familial late-onset AD. ApoE plays vital role in the metabolism and clearance of A␤ along with ␣2M and low-density lipoprotein receptor (LRP). The biochemical outcome of harboring the APOE ε4 allele includes increased A␤ aggregation and decreased clearance. Thus, all of the established AD susceptibility genes impact on A␤ production, deposition, or clearance, providing strong genetic support to the amyloid cascade hypothesis.

Secretases are principal players of APP processing. APP is an integral type I membrane glycoprotein that is trafficked through the constitutive secretory pathway. It has a large amino terminal extracellular/luminal domain (ectodomain) and a short cytoplasmic tail. APP is expressed as three alternatively spliced isoforms: APP695 (neuronal form), and APP770/751 isoforms (peripheral and glial isoforms). The later isoforms contain Kunitztype protease inhibitor domain within the ectodomain. Both amyloidogenic and nonamyloidogenic proteolytic pathways metabolize APP (figure 1). Processing of APP occurs in sequential events that involve shedding of the ectodomain by either ␣-secretase (nonamyloidogenic pathway) or ␤-secretase (amyloidogenic pathway) to generate membrane-tethered ␣and ␤-C-terminal fragments (CTFs), respectively. ␣-Secretase cleaves APP within the A␤ domain (between residues Lys16 and Leu17 of A␤), essentially precluding the generation of intact A␤. A multimeric protein complex, termed ␥secretase, subsequently cleaves these ␣and ␤-CTFs within the transmembrane domain, to generate p3 (3 kDa) and A␤ (4 kDa) peptides, respectively. Both A␤ and p3 peptides are readily secreted by cultured cells. Although A␤ peptides have the propensity to aggregate in vitro and A␤ deposits in brain serves as seed for the development of senile plaques, p3 peptides are not often associated with these deposits.

Amyloidogenesis is the favored pathway of APP metabolism in neurons, and nonamyloidogenic pathway is predominant in all other cell types. Commitment of APP to these pathways can be modulated by the activation of cell-surface receptors, which respond to transduction pathways including calcium, arachidonic acid metabolites, and PKC. 6,7 Whereas secreted APPS␣ has been reported to have neurotrophic properties, A␤ peptides exert contrasting effects on neuronal survival. Hence, the nonamyloidgenic pathway appears to be neuroprotective compared to the neurodegenerative, amyloidogenic pathway.

Several zinc metallopreoteinases, including TACE/ADAM17, ADAM9, ADAM10 and MDC-9 and an aspartyl protease BACE2 can cleave APP at the ␣-secretase site. 8 The major neuronal ␤-secretase is a transmembrane aspartyl protease, termed BACE1 (␤-site APP cleaving enzyme; also called Asp-2 and memapsin-2). BACE1 cleaves APP within the ectodomain, generating the N-terminus of A␤. 9 BACE1 undergoes complex post-translational modifications including N-glysosylation, phosphorylation, disulfide bridge formation, palmitoylation, and pro-peptide cleavage. Interestingly, affinity of BACE1 toward APP is relatively low and it is believed that APP is not its sole physiologic substrate. The minimal components of ␥-secretase include PS1 or PS2, nicastrin, APH-1, and PEN-2. Several lines of evidence suggest that PSs play a crucial role in intramembranous ␥-secretase cleavage of select type I membrane proteins other than APP, including the Notch1 receptor and its ligands, Delta and Jagged2, cell-surface adhesion protein CD44, the receptor tyrosine kinase ErbB4, netrin receptor DCC, low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein, cell adhesion molecules Nand E-cadherins, and synaptic adhesion protein nectin-1␣, cell surface (heparin sulfate proteoglycan) HSPG syndecan-3, p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR), etc. Ever increasing number of transmembrane substrates and intracellular domains released by the proteolytic cleavage of these substrates indicate that, in addition to being a modulator of many cell signaling paradigms via cleavage of proteins such as Notch, ␥ -secretase could simply be a proteosome or secretosome that catabolises membranebound protein "stubs" of type I membrane proteins. 10 Outcome of ␥-secretase cleavage of substrates can either be activation of signaling as is the case in Notch receptor cleavage and the release of Notch intracellular domain, or termination of signaling as described for intramembraneous cleavage of DCC. 11 Apart from its essential role in the proteolytic function of the ␥ -secretase, PS1 and PS2 have been shown to participate in crucial physiologic functions, including calcium homeostasis, neuronal signaling, protein trafficking, fine-tuning of immune system, neurite outgrowth, apoptosis, memory, and synaptic plasticity. 5,12 Hence, although APP secretases and factors regulating their activity in amyloidogenic pathway have long been considered as therapeutic targets for the treatment of AD, it is unclear whether secretase inhibitors will be free from serious side effects.

Intracellular itinerary and processing of APP in the biosynthetic/endocytic pathways. During its transit from the ER to the plasma membrane through the constitutive secretory pathway (figure 2), nascent APP undergoes post-translational modification by N-and O-glycosylation, phosphorylation, and tyrosine sulfation. In cultured cells, it is esti-mated that only about 10% of nascent APP molecules are successfully delivered to the plasma membrane. APP can be proteolytically processed at the cell surface primarily by ␣-secretases, resulting in the shedding of APPs␣ ectodomain. 13 Activation of protein kinase C increases APPs ␣-secretion by mechanisms involving the formation and release of secretory vesicles from the trans-Golgi network, thus enhancing APP (and possibly the ␣-secretase) trafficking to the cell surface.

Unlike many cell surface receptors, full-length APP does not reside for considerable length of time at the cell surface. Approximately 70% of surfacebound APP is internalized within minutes of arriving at the plasma membrane. A "YENPTY" internalization motif located near the C-terminus of APP is responsible for this efficient internalization. Following endocytosis, APP is delivered to late endosomes and a fraction of endocytosed molecules is recycled to the cell surface. Measurable amounts of internalized APP also undergo degradation within the lysosome. BACE1 is predominantly localized in late Golgi/TGN and endosomes and cleaves wild-type APP during endocytic/recycling steps, 14 releasing APPs␤ and generating ␤-CTF (see figure 1). Acidic optimal pH of BACE1 also supports the notion that it likely cleaves APP during transit in acidic endocytic compartments. Available data indicate the presence of ␥-secretase complex and enzyme activity in multiple compartments including the ER, late-Golgi/TGN, endosomes and plasma membrane. [15][16][17][18][19] Recent studies estimated that only 6% of ␥-secretase activity at the cell-surface. 20 The majority of the mature components of ␥-secretase complex are localized in intracellular organelles such as ERGIC, Golgi apparatus, the TGN, and late endosomes. 21 A␤ is mainly generated in TGN as APP is trafficked through the secretory and recycling pathways (see figure 2). Consequently, mutations within the YENPTY motif inhibit the internalization of APP and decrease A␤ generation. 22 Several cytosolic adaptors with phosphotyrosine-binding domains, including Fe65, Mint 1, Mint 2, and Mint3, bind to the APP cytoplasmic tail at or near the YENPTY motif, and regulate APP trafficking and processing. 23 Interestingly, FE65 acts as a functional linker between APP and LRP in modulating endocytic APP trafficking and amyloidogenic processing. 24 In addition, phosphorylation of Thr-668 within the cytosolic domain of APP seems to modulate amyloidogenic processing by facilitating cleavage by BACE. 25 Despite the elaborate regulatory mechanisms that modulate cell surface transport and endocytic trafficking of APP, transit through these compartments is not essential for generation of A␤ as shown by amyloidogenic processing of APP in cells expressing syntaxin 1A mutants defective in exocytosis. 26 Raft association of secretases and amyloidogenic processing. Growing evidence indicates a functional relationship between cellular cholesterol level and efficiency of amyloidogenic processing. Cholesterol depletion of cultured cells by lovastatin treatment and methyl-␤-cyclodextrin (M␤CD) extraction inhibits APP processing by BACE1 and lowers A␤ production. 27 On the contrary, moderate (but not complete) reduction of cholesterol leads to increased amyloidogenesis in neuronal cells, indicating the importance and requirement of cholesterol for APP secretase activities. 28 Recent cell biology investigations indicate that specialized cellular membrane microdomains rich in cholesterol and sphingolipids, termed "lipid rafts," might be the link between cholesterol and amyloidogenic processing of APP.

Lipid rafts function in the trafficking of proteins in the secretory and endocytic pathways in epithelial cells and neurons, and participate in a number of important biologic functions. 29 Lipid rafts are biochemically defined as detergent-insoluble membrane (DIM) domains that resist extraction with Triton X100 or Lubrol at 4°C. 30 These microdomains assemble in the Golgi and are predominantly located at the plasma membrane. Mounting evidence suggests that lipid rafts may be the principal membrane platforms where amyloidogenic processing of APP takes place. As mentioned above, BACE undergoes palmitoylation, a post-translational modification that targets proteins to lipid rafts. Indeed, significant fraction of BACE1 is localized in lipid raft microdomains in a cholesterol-dependent manner, and addition of GPIanchor to target BACE1 exclusively to lipid rafts increases APP processing at the ␤-cleavage site. 31,32 Elegant studies by Simons and colleagues showed antibody-mediated co-patching of cell surface APP and BACE1 as well as amyloidogenic processing of APP in raft microdomains. 33 Recently, we reported that the all four components of the ␥-secretase complex (PS1-derived N-and C-terminal fragments, nicastrin, APH-1, and PEN-2) are localized in DIM fractions enriched in lipid raft markers, flotillin-2 and PrP. 21 Association of ␥-secretase components with DIM is sensitive to cholesterol depletion, fulfilling a stringent criterion for determining lipid raft localization. In contrast to BACE1 and the ␥secretase complex, ␣-secretases have not been linked to raft microdomains based on cholesterol depletion/ loading studies. 33 Thus, mounting evidence suggest that lipid rafts could be the principal membrane platforms for amyloidogenic processing of APP.

Detailed biochemical fractionation studies, including magnetic immunoisolation, indicate that active and mature components of ␥-secretase complex coreside in lipid raft microdomains with SNARES such as VAMP-4 (TGN), syntaxin 6 (TGN and vesicles), and syntaxin 13 (late endosomes). 21 These studies strongly implicate lipid raft microdomains of intracellular organelles as the preferred sites of amyloidogenic processing. Interestingly, the cell-surface raft associated protein, SNAP-23 does not co-reside with mature components of ␥-secretase complex, 21 raising the possibility that the relatively low level of active ␥-secretase complex at the cell-surface could be residing in nonraft membrane domains. Such spatially distinct localization of the ␥-secretase allows for intramembrane processing of diverse substrates. Indeed, our recent studies indicate that APP CTFs in adult brain and cultured cells preferentially accumulate in raft microdomains, whereas several other substrates such as CTFs derived from Notch1, Jagged2, N-cadherin, and DCC remain in nonraft membranes. 34 Taken together, these findings are consistent with the prediction that ␥-secretase cleavage of APP occurs in lipid rafts. Further investigations are needed to address how the components of the ␥-secretase and APP CTFs are recruited into raft microdomains. In conclusion, assimilated evidence from a variety of in vitro and in vivo studies indicates that cholesterol-laden membrane microdomains of intracellular organelles are involved in amyloidogenic processing. Further work is necessary to resolve how genetic mutations in APP, PS1, and PS2 exert their effects in a manner that fosters selective increase in A␤42 peptides.

Perspectives on amyloidogenesis in sporadic inclusion-body myositis. Accumulation of APP and its proteolytic derivatives including A␤ peptides in vacuolated muscle fibers is a prominent pathologic feature of sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM). 35,36 Unusually high levels of BACE and components of the ␥-secretase have been observed in s-IBM muscle fibers, providing one potential mechanism for increased amyloidogenic processing of APP in the muscle fibers of affected individuals. Other cellular abnormalities such as elevated levels and sustained association of ER chaperones with APP, accumulation of several abnormal proteins, and the presence of aggresomes [36][37][38] indicate potential defects in the folding of nascent APP and proteolytic processing of cellular proteins in affected muscle fibers. Furthermore, abnormalities in free cholesterol and caveolin-1 observed in s-IBM muscle fibers 39 are likely to influence amyloidogenic processing of APP by affecting the localization of APP and/or secretases within cholesterol and caveolin-rich lipid raft microdomains of membrane organelles. The development of an appropriate cell culture or transgenic animal model for s-IBM will greatly facilitate further investigation of amyloidogenic processing of APP.

Supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health, Alzheimer's Association, and American Health Assistance Foundation (G.T.), and a fellowship from the Alzheimer Disease Research Fund of Illinois Department of Public Health (K.S.V.).

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. Proteolytic processing of APP. (A) Schematic structure of APP is shown with A␤ domain shaded in red and enlarged. The sites of cleavage by ␣-, ␤-, and ␥-secretases are indicated along with A␤ numbering from the N-terminus of A␤ (Asp1). (B) Nonamyloidogenic processing of APP refers to sequential processing of APP by membrane-bound ␣and ␥-secretases. ␣-Secretase cleaves within the A␤ domain, thus precluding generation of intact A␤ peptide. The fates of N-terminally truncated A␤ (p3) and APP intracellular domain (AICD) is not fully resolved. (C) Amyloidogenic processing of APP is carried out by sequential action of membrane-bound ␤and ␥-secretases.

Figure 2 .2Figure 2. Intracellular trafficking of APP. Nascent APP molecules mature through the constitutive secretory pathway. Once APP reaches the cell surface, it is rapidly internalized and subsequently trafficked through endocytic and recycling compartments back to the cell surface or degraded in the lysosome. Nonamyloidogenic processing mainly occurs at the cell surface where ␣-secretases are present. Amyloidogenic processing involves transit through the endocytic organelles where APP encounters ␤and ␥-secretases.

