Brain and brawn Parallels in oxidative strength

Neuronal oxidative stress occurs early in the progression of Alzheimer disease (AD), significantly before the development of the pathologic hallmarks, neurofibrillary tangles, and senile plaques. Study of Down syndrome, cases with autosomal dominant mutation, and sporadic AD all suggest amyloid-␤ deposition and hyperphosphorylated function as compensatory responses and downstream adaptations to ensure that neuronal cells do not succumb to oxidative damage. Amyloid-␤ and hyperphosphorylation also define vulnerable muscle cells in sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM). The role of the structural changes of s-IBM, as in AD, remains to be determined but may mark a critical response yielding a novel balance in oxidant homeostasis.

Alzheimer disease (AD) is a common and complex neurodegenerative disorder that affects approximately 15 million people worldwide. 1 Aging is the major risk factor for a disease that coexists with other causes of cognitive decline, particularly diffuse Lewy body disease and Pick diseases as well as frontal temporal dementia that can masquerade as AD. The neuropathological hallmarks of AD are intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (NFT), containing mainly polymerized and hyperphosphorylated protein, and the accumulation of extracellular amyloid plaques containing mainly amyloid-␤ (A␤). AD is devastating, and, despite great strides in recent years, still puzzling in its causes and mechanisms. Although the etiology of AD remains largely unclear, there is accumulating evidence that oxidative stress plays an important role in the disease pathophysiology. However, intracellular oxidative balance is tightly regulated and, therefore, the activation of multiple signaling pathways and the upregulation of compensatory mechanisms would be expected to occur in neurons from AD patients.

Complex pathophysiology involving formation of lesions that are similar to those of AD but found in muscle characterizes sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM), an age-dependent degenerative condition. Although neurodegenerative conditions show distinct pathologic profiles from AD, s-IBM shows almost complete overlap with those displayed with AD, prion, [2][3][4] and Parkinson 5 diseases. Finding the changes of AD in muscle cells makes one consider what is shared between neurons and muscle. The accessibility of muscle cells to culture offers the opportunity to manipulate cells through genetic or pharmacologic interventions, techniques lacking in AD research. These aspects are discussed in great length in the accompanying articles. We review the oxidative abnormalities and compensations that define AD that have bearing on both disease conditions.

Oxidative stress is a prominent event in the development of Alzheimer disease. Oxidative status was initially understood as oxidative stress (i.e., the breaching of oxidant defenses with consequent cellular detrimental effect). 6 According to this definition, detection of damage resulting from reactive oxygen or nitrogen species indicates the existence of oxidative stress. However, living systems dynamically regulate their defense mechanisms in response to oxidative stress. Therefore, increases in oxidative damage do not indicate that the cell is succumbing to oxidative stress but indicates an increase in defenses sufficient to compensate for the increased flux of reactive species responsible for the damage. This concept is critically outlined by evidence suggesting that cells that fail to compensate for oxidative imbalance enter into apoptosis, which in turn leads to death within hours. 7 Following this point of view, we suggest that cells can only experience oxidative stress for short periods of time without rapidly dying. 8,9 In chronic degenerative disorders, such as AD, the cells experiencing increased oxidative damage develop compensatory responses aimed to avoid, or at least reduce, cellular damage.

Oxidative damage is a prominent and early feature of vulnerable neurons in AD. 10,11 Oxidative modification of macromolecules has been described in association with the susceptible neurons of AD in numerous studies. Such modifications include advanced glycation end products, 12 nitration, 11 lipid peroxidation adduction products, 13,14 carbonylmodified neurofilament protein, and free carbonyls, as well as glycation and glycoxidation products. [15][16][17] Levels of these markers are initially elevated following some unknown triggering neuronal event, but these levels soon decrease as the disease progresses to advanced AD. 18 Together these findings suggest that increased oxidative damage is not the terminal sequelae of the disease but instead plays an initial role. They also suggest that damage does not mark further destruction by reactive species and is instead marked by a broad array of increased cellular defenses. 18 It can be argued that in AD these defenses are responsible for the reduction of damage if we view AD in isolation. However, when seen in the context of other conditions where reactive oxygen and nitrogen species are involved and damage is either limited or absent, such as Parkinson disease (PD), this leads us to consider whether oxidative damage noted in AD may be better thought of as homeostatic, such that oxidative damage could initiate signal transduction pathways to manipulate cellular responses to stress, which are characterized by increased levels of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species. 18 Mitochondria. Extensive evidence indicates that cerebral oxidative metabolism is reduced in AD, 19 placing mitochondria as a key player in this scenario. 20 Mitochondria are essential organelles for neuronal function because, differing from muscle, the limited glycolytic capacity of these cells makes them highly dependent on aerobic oxidative phosphorylation for their energetic needs. However, oxidative phosphorylation is a major source of endogenous toxic free radicals, including hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), hydroxyl (OH⅐) and superoxide (O2 -⅐) that are products of normal cellular respiration. 21 Reactive species generated by mitochondria have several cellular targets including mitochondrial components themselves (lipids, proteins, and DNA). The lack of histones in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and diminished capacity for DNA repair render mitochondria an easy target to oxidative stress events. By releasing high levels of H 2 O 2 , dysfunctional mitochondria promote the interaction between redox metals and oxidative response elements. 22 The role of mitochondria in AD was studied in our laboratory using in situ hybridization to mitochondrial DNA, immunocytochemistry of cytochrome oxidase, and morphometry of electron micrographs of biopsy specimens to determine whether there were mitochondrial abnormalities in AD. 20,23 We found that the neurons show-ing increased oxidative damage in AD possess also a striking and significant increase in mtDNA and cytochrome oxidase. Surprisingly, much of the mtDNA and cytochrome oxidase is found in the neuronal cytoplasm and in the case of mtDNA, the vacuoles associated with lipofuscin, whereas morphometric analysis showed that mitochondria are significantly reduced in AD. Mitochondrial abnormalities such as accumulation of deleted mtDNA also characterize s-IBM. [24][25][26][27] We also observed an overall reduction in microtubules in AD compared to controls. 28 Altogether these data indicate that the abnormal mitochondrial turnover, as indicated by increased perikaryal mtDNA and mitochondrial protein accumulation in the face of reduced numbers of mitochondria, could be due to a defective microtubule metabolism resulting in deficient mitochondrial transport in the axon. This may, in turn, set up a pathologic cascade of events in the perikaryal mitochondria. It would be intriguing to examine microtubules in s-IBM because abnormalities define the condition.

Accumulating evidence indicate that hemeoxygenase-1 (HO-1) is induced in AD brains. [29][30][31] HO-1 catalyzes the conversion of heme to biliverdin and iron. Biliverdin, in turn, is reduced to bilirubin, an antioxidant. Because HO-1 is induced in proportion to the level of heme, 32 the induction of HO-1 suggests that there may be abnormal turnover of heme in AD. This idea is consistent with the mitochondrial abnormalities associated to AD because it is well known that many heme-containing enzymes are found in mitochondria. As previously discussed, our ultrastructural studies concerning mitochondria suggest a high rate of mitochondrial turnover and redox activity in the residual body of lipofuscin 20 with lysosomes as the probable sources of heme. In turn, the increase in heme induces synthesis of more HO-1, suggesting that mitochondrial turnover promotes oxidative stress via increase of redox-active iron. 33 Furthermore, we observed that oxidized nucleic acids are commonly observed in the cytoplasm of the neurons that are particularly vulnerable to degeneration in sporadic 34,35 and familial 36 AD, which suggest a link between oxidative stress and not only age-associated degenerative diseases but also neurodegeneration linked to genetic factors. 8-hydroxyguanosine (8OHG), a marker of nucleic acids oxidation, is likely to form at the site of ⅐OH production, a process dependent on redox-active metalcatalyzed reduction of H 2 O 2 together with cellular reductants such as ascorbate or O 2 -. Interestingly, the levels of 8OHG are inversely related to the extent of A␤ deposits being this oxidative marker is found physically distant from the A␤ deposits 34 suggesting a complex interplay between A␤ and redox metal activity that may be critical to metal dynamics within the neuronal cytoplasm. A possible key element to these dynamics is mitochondria.

Cellular compensatory responses.

Oxidative modification and response are controlled events that play critical roles in response to oxidative stress. This view is supported by data comparing AD with normal aging, where we documented the same profile of damage, albeit with lower levels. 34 AD differs from other neurodegenerative diseases in that it shows exponential prevalence with aging. This makes AD a part of the normal aging process, which encompasses additional specific pathologic mechanisms and suggests that many of the oxidative modifications may not only result from aging but also play a role in balancing systems underlying the metabolic abnormalities present in AD. Support for this idea comes from the analysis of lipid peroxidative modification of and neurofilament heavy subunit (NFH), two of the components of neurofibrillary tangles. 37 Recently, Wataya et al. 38 suggested that NFTs are antioxidants because both and neurofilament protein appear uniquely adapted to oxidative attack due to their high content of lysine-serine-proline domains. Exposure of these domains on the surface is affected by extensive phosphorylation of serine residues. 38,39 In AD, both and NFH are found as adducts of HNE and the modifications are controlled by phosphorylation. 30,38 While NFH is modified by HNE at similar levels in AD and controls (Perry and Smith, unpublished data), normal brains present only small modifications. 30 modification by HNE greatly increases its ability to form filaments, in vitro 40 and in cells, 41 similar to those found in NFT. The link to phosphorylation and the known similarity of oxidative imbalance to induction of the MAP kinase pathway 22,[42][43][44] suggest that lipid peroxidation modification of is regulated by signal transduction pathways. Studies performed with rodents show that NFH-HNE levels do not increase with aging or movement of NFH to terminals, suggesting that levels of adduction are further regulated by removal or reversal of NFH-HNE adducts. 38 These data indicate these processes may play a physiologic role in axons, possibly in protecting axonal components by scavenging toxic aldehydes formed during normal metabolism. This would be essential for axons, which cannot turn over and replace proteins as rapidly as cell bodies.

Transfection studies of neuroblastoma cells show that HO-1 expression is coordinated with phosphorylation suggesting a physiologic interaction between cytoskeleton reorganization and oxidation. 45 In consideration of the enzymatic activity of HO-1 to produce iron and to bind iron, 46 the coordination may relate to iron homeostasis. These results clearly implicate a regulated process for modifications and responses. Changes such as HO-1 and MAP kinase pathway induction may be only a few of many responses that interrelate to lipid peroxidative modifications. In this way, oxidative damage is no longer an end stage but rather a signal of underlying changes of state.

Furthermore, an antioxidant role for A␤ in vivo is in agreement with recent data on the distribution of oxidative damage to AD neurons. 8OHG, a major product of nucleic acid oxidation, markedly accumu-

Figure 1. Possible sequence of neuronal events that occurs in Alzheimer disease (AD). In the initial stages of AD, the increase in oxidative stress levels, mainly promoted by the interplay between the reactive species formed by mitochondria and the transition metals, induce neuronal compensatory responses and downstream adaptations, such as MAP kinase activation, A␤ deposition and hyperphosphorylation, aimed to avoid neuronal damage and/or

death. However, with the progression of AD and the consequent increase of reactive species levels, the efficient removal of A␤-metal complexes and, probably, hyperphosphorylated would be overtaken by their disproportionably high generation, resulting in and uncontrollable growth of plaques and NFT. These responses are associated with a reduction in normal cell function resulting, inevitably, in neuronal damage and death.

lates in the cytoplasm of cerebral neurons in AD. Unexpectedly, an increase in A␤ deposition in AD cortex is associated with a decrease in neuronal level of 8OHG, such as with decreased oxidative damage. 34,47 Similar negative correlation between A␤ deposition and oxidative damage is found in patients with Down syndrome. 48 A␤ deposits observed in both studies mainly consist of early diffuse plaques meaning that these diffuse amyloid plaques may be considered as a compensatory response that reduces oxidative stress. 49 The protective properties of A␤ could be related with its capacity to scavenge free radicals and the chelation of transition metals. 50,51 Altogether these findings suggest that both A␤ and NFT, in the initial stages of AD development, may be compensations to increased oxidative stress and might play a similar role in s-IBM.

Therapeutic strategies. Given the proximal role and devastating effect that oxidative stress plays in AD pathogenesis, a therapeutic strategy based on fighting oxidative stress appears reasonable. Certainly, such an assumption should be considered more reasonable than strategies based either on removal of A␤ or on preventing the phosphorylation of it, because both represent downstream consequences of oxidative stress and/or a concerted cellular effort to maintain homeostatic balance. In addition, data from the literature show that strategies envisaging the removal of A␤ deposits (immunotherapy) have severe side effects such as the activation of CNS inflammatory responses 52,53 as well as possible consequences of removal of A␤ from the brain. 7,54 There is overwhelming clinical evidence that antioxidants, free-radical fighters, slow the symptoms of both dementia and AD. Although modest, several epidemiologic studies have shown lower risks of dementia and AD progression in people taking dietary antioxidants. 55 However, the broad occurrence of AD (almost 50% by the age of 85), the nonregenerative nature of the CNS and the fact that diagnosis often does not occur until late in disease progression, suggest that the ideal antioxidant should be used as prophylactic treatment in aged population. Due to their low toxicity, low cost and their ability to target the earliest sources of oxidative stress in AD, antioxidant therapies are particularly attractive. Could antioxidants have therapeutic utility in s-IBM?

Conclusions. Oxidative stress is not the breach of antioxidant defenses for chronic conditions, pathologic and physiologic, and that a better understanding occurs by viewing each circumstance as a different homeostatic balance in which reactive oxygen and nitrogen species play a key regulatory role. In the initial stages of AD development, neuronal cells despite showing increased oxidative damage may actually be in homeostatic balance. If cells survive and function in the presence of high levels of oxidative stress, it is because critical systems of cells are not damaged. In this way, detection of increased oxidative damage, in cells that survive, must be associated with a commensurate increase in compensatory mechanisms such as A␤ deposition and hyperphosphorylated . However, with the progression of AD and the consequent increase of reactive species levels, the efficient removal of A␤-metal complexes and, probably, hyperphosphorylated would be overtaken by their disproportionably high generation, resulting in an uncontrollable growth of senile plaques and NFT and consequently, an increase in reactive species generation. This would result in a feedback mechanism that could exacerbate plaque and NFT growth and reactive species generation, leading to a functional demise of neurons (figure 1).

Muscle cells in s-IBM show many of the same changes documented in AD (figure 2) and it would seem likely that similar mechanisms are involved. Neurons and muscle share high metabolic activity and are postmitotic. A highly developed cytoskeleton is essential to both, for movement in muscle and transport in neurons. Understanding and dissecting these commonalities that lead to similar pathophysiology will result in a better mechanistic appreciation of s-IBM and AD. 56 

Supported by the National Institues of Health, the Alzheimer's Association,

Figure 2 .2Figure 2. Similar pathologic changes define vulnerable neurons in AD and muscle cells in s-IBM. They share almost every feature.

