Homocysteine-induced endoplasmic reticulum protein (Herp) is up-regulated in sporadic inclusion-body myositis and in endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced cultured human muscle fibers

Herp is a stress-response protein localized in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane. Herp was proposed to improve ER-folding, decrease ER protein load, and participate in ERassociated degradation (ERAD). Intra-muscle-fiber ubiquitinated multiprotein-aggregates containing, among other proteins, either amyloid-b (Ab) or phosphorylated tau are characteristic of sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM). ER stress and proteasome inhibition appear to play a role in s-IBM pathogenesis. We have now studied Herp in s-IBM muscle fibers and in ER-stress-induced or proteasome-inhibited cultured human muscle fibers. In s-IBM muscle fibers: (i) Herp was strongly immunoreactive in the form of aggregates, which co-localized with Ab, GRP78, and b2 proteasome subunit; (ii) Herp mRNA and protein were increased. In ER-stress-induced cultured human muscle fibers: (i) Herp immunoreactivity was diffusely increased; (ii) Herp mRNA and protein were increased. In proteasome-inhibited cultured human muscle fibers: (i) Herp immunoreactivity was in the form of aggregates; (ii) Herp protein was increased, but its mRNA was not. Accordingly, in s-IBM muscle fibers: (i) increase of Herp might be due to both ER-stress and proteasome inhibition; (ii) co-localization of Herp with Ab, proteasome, and ERchaperone GRP78 could reflect its possible role in processing and degradation of cytotoxic proteins in ER.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) functions include processing, folding, and exporting of newly synthesized proteins into the secretory pathway (Ellgaard and Helenius 2001). An efficient system of molecular chaperones in the ER is required to assure proper folding of misfolded abnormal and native proteins (Kaufman 1999). Unfolded proteins accumulating in the ER lead to ER-stress (Rutkowski and Kaufman 2004;Shen et al. 2004). This elicits the unfolded protein response (UPR), a functional mechanism by which cells attempt to protect themselves against ER-stress (Mori 2000;Rutkowski and Kaufman 2004). The UPR involves: (i) attenuating translation to reduce protein overload and subsequent accumulation of unfolded proteins (Mori 2000;Liu and Kaufman 2003); (ii) transcriptional induction of ER chaperone proteins, which increase folding capacity of the ER and prevent protein aggregation (Mori 2000;Liu and Kaufman 2003); (iii) removing misfolded proteins from the ER through retrograde transport coupled to their degradation by 26S proteasome, called ER-associated degradation (ERAD) (Travers et al. 2000).

Herp (homocysteine-induced ER protein) is a novel 54 kDa protein recently described as a stress-response protein localized in the ER membrane (Kokame et al. 2000). Under ERstress, Herp is the most highly inducible protein (Yamamoto et al. 2004). Unlike other stress-induced ER chaperones, Herp is an integral membrane protein whose N-and C-terminals both face the cytoplasm (Kokame et al. 2000;Sai et al. 2002). Its N-terminus has an ubiquitin-like domain (ULD) (Kokame et al. 2000), which is probably involved in Herp degradation via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway (Sai et al. 2003). Cellular functions of Herp are gradually being discovered. It was suggested that during ER stress, Herp plays a neuroprotective role in brain by stabilizing ER Ca 2+ homeostasis and maintaining mitochondrial function (Chan et al. 2004). Herp was also proposed to improve ER folding capacity, decrease ER protein load (Hori et al. 2004), and participate in the ERAD (Yamamoto et al. 2004;Schroder and Kaufman 2005). Herp was also proposed to prevent apoptosis triggered by ER stress (Chan et al. 2004;Hori et al. 2004). Furthermore, Herp was reported to interact with presenilins and, through this mechanism, to increase production of amyloid-b (Ab) (Sai et al. 2002), which is considered to be cytotoxic in sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM) muscle and in Alzheimer disease (AD) brain (Askanas andEngel 2001, 2003;Selkoe 2001;Cuello 2005).

s-IBM, the most common progressive degenerative muscle disease of persons age 50 years and older, is of unknown etiology and pathogenesis (Askanas andEngel 2001, 2002). It leads to severe disability and there is no successful treatment (Askanas andEngel 2001, 2003). The main lightmicroscopic features of s-IBM muscle biopsies include: (i) vacuolated muscle fibers, (ii) intramuscle-fiber multiprotein aggregates, and (iii) various degrees of mononuclear-cell inflammation (Askanas andEngel 2001, 2003). An intriguing feature is the similarity of the s-IBM muscle-fiber phenotype to that of AD brain, including accumulation of Ab, phosphorylated tau, and several other Alzheimer characteristic proteins (Askanas andEngel 2001, 2003). Two major types of intracellular inclusion-bodies in s-IBM muscle contain either Ab or phosphorylated tau (Askanas andEngel 2001, 2002). Both types of inclusions are congophilic, indicating that they contain proteins in alternate conformation (unfolded or misfolded) that are assembled into the bpleated sheet configuration of amyloid (Askanas andEngel 2001, 2003). The cytoplasmic inclusion-bodies are present mainly in vacuole-free regions of vacuolated muscle fibers, and in muscle fibers not vacuolated at the level of the inclusion-bodies.

Ab and phosphorylated-tau inclusions contain several other accumulated proteins, some of which are present in both (Askanas andEngel 2001, 2003). Some, such as asynuclein, have, similarly to Ab and tau, a propensity to unfold, misfold, and form b-pleated-sheet amyloid (Borden 1998).

We have recently demonstrated in s-IBM muscle fibers that several ER chaperones are accumulated in the form of aggregates and their total expression is increased, suggesting that ER stress and UPR play a role in the s-IBM pathogenesis (Vattemi et al. 2004). Those ER chaperones physically associate with Ab, suggesting that they may play a role in Ab folding and/or attempted disposal of Ab in s-IBM muscle fibers (Vattemi et al. 2004). Our most recent study demonstrated significant proteasomal inhibition and aggresome formation in s-IBM fibers (Fratta et al. 2005). Those studies further support our previous proposal that unfolding and misfolding of proteins play a role in formation of the multiprotein-aggregates (inclusions) within s-IBM muscle fibers (Askanas andEngel 2002, 2003).

In the present study, we asked whether Herp might play a role in the s-IBM pathogenesis. We examined Herp expression in s-IBM muscle fibers on the mRNA and protein levels, and Herp light-and electronmicroscopic immunolocalization, including its co-immunolocalization with Ab, ER chaperone BiP/GRP78 (immunoglobulin heavy chain-binding protein/glucose-regulated protein 78), 20S b2 proteasome subunit, and ubiquitin. To explore the mechanisms involved in regulating Herp in human muscle fibers, we utilized ER stress-induced and proteasome-inhibited cultured human muscle fibers.

Experimental procedures

Muscle biopsies

Immunocytochemical studies were performed on 10-lm-thick unfixed sections of fresh-frozen diagnostic muscle biopsies obtained (with informed consent) from 34 patients with these diagnoses: 13 s-IBM; four polymyositis; one dermatomyositis; two morphologically non-specific myopathy; two mitochondrial myopathy; one peripheral neuropathy; two amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; two oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy, one non-IBM vacuolar myopathy, and six normal muscle. Diagnoses were based on clinical and laboratory investigations, including our routinely performed 18-reaction diagnostic histochemistry of the biopsies. All s-IBM biopsies had muscle fibers with vacuoles on Engel trichrome staining (Engel and Cunningham 1963), 15-21 nm paired helical filaments by SMI-31 immunoreactivity (Askanas et al. 1996a) and by electronmicroscopy, and Congo-red positivity using fluorescence enhancement (Askanas et al. 1993b).

Light-microscopic immunocytochemistry

Fluorescence immunocytochemistry was performed as described (Askanas et al. 1993a(Askanas et al. , 1996a(Askanas et al. , 2000;;Vattemi et al. 2003Vattemi et al. , 2004) ) using a well-characterized polyclonal antibody against Herp, diluted 1 : 100 (Kokame et al. 2000). Double-immunofluorescence utilized an antibody against Herp combined with one of the following: (i) mouse monoclonal antibody 6E10 (Signet, Dedham, MA, USA), diluted 1 : 100, which morphologically recognizes Ab in both AD brain (Kim et al. 1990) and s-IBM muscle (Askanas et al. 2000); (ii) mouse monoclonal antibody recognizing BiP/GRP78 (BD Transduction Laboratories, San Diego, CA, USA) diluted 1 : 20; (iii) mouse monoclonal antibody recognizing 20S proteasomal subunit b2 (Affinity Research Products Ltd, UK) diluted 1 : 50; (iv) mouse monoclonal antibody recognizing ubiquitin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) diluted 1 : 50.

To block non-specific binding of antibody to Fc receptors, sections were pre-incubated with normal goat or rabbit serum diluted 1 : 10, as described (Askanas et al. 1993a(Askanas et al. , 2000)). Controls for staining specificity were (i) omission of the primary antibody or (ii) its replacement with non-immune sera or irrelevant antibody.

Immuno-electronmicroscopy

Double-label gold immuno-electronmicroscopy was performed on 10-lm unfixed frozen biopsy sections adhered to the bottom of 35-mm Petri dishes, as detailed (Askanas et al. 1993a(Askanas et al. , 1996a(Askanas et al. , 2000)). In brief, a primary antibody against Herp was used in combination with an antibody against Ab, 20S proteasome, or BiP/ GRP78. After incubation with the appropriate secondary antibodies conjugated to 5 nm and 15 nm gold particles, sections were processed for electronmicroscopy as described (Askanas et al. 1993a(Askanas et al. , 1996a(Askanas et al. , 2000)).

Immunoblotting

Muscle biopsies of seven s-IBM and seven age-matched control patients were immunoblotted, as recently detailed (Vattemi et al. 2003(Vattemi et al. , 2004)). Briefly, 10-lm-thick frozen sections were collected in ristocetin-induced platelet agglutination (RIPA) buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 0.25% Nadeoxycholate, 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate) containing phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Diagnostic, Mannheim, Germany). All samples were rapidly homogenized on ice. Protein concentration was measured using the Bradford method (Vattemi et al. 2004): 20 lg of protein were loaded onto 10% NuPAGE gels (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), electrophoresed, transferred to nitrocellulose membranes, and immuno-probed with antibodies against Herp. After incubation in the appropriate secondary antibodies, blots were developed using an enhanced chemiluminescence system (ECL) (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ, USA). Protein loading was evaluated by the actin band visualized with a mouse monoclonal antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Quantification of the immunoreactivity was performed by densitometric analysis using NIH Image J 1.310 software.

RNA isolation and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction

Total RNA from 10-lm-thick frozen sections of s-IBM and control muscle biopsies was isolated using an RNA isolation kit (BD Pharmingen, San Diego, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. RNA samples were treated with Dnase I (Amplification Grade, Invitrogen) and 1 lg of RNA was submitted for cDNA synthesis using an oligo-dT primer (Invitrogen) and the Omniscript RT kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). Then 1/10 of the RT reaction was amplified using multiplex PCR in a total volume of 20 lL, with Platinum Taq DNA Polymerase (Invitrogen), utilizing previously described primers for Herp (Kokame et al. 2000) and for glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) (Lehmann et al. 2002) as an internal control. The optimized conditions for Herp and GAPDH amplification were 2 min at 94°C followed by 28 cycles of amplification (94°C for 30 s, 60°C for 30 s, 72°C for 90 s), and the final incubation was 10 min at 72°C. The PCR products were separated on a 2% agarose gel and stained with ethidium bromide. The conditions of the reactions were experimentally checked to ensure that signals were in the linear range of the PCR. Identity of the products was confirmed by sequencing.

Statistical analysis

The statistical significance of differences between groups was determined by Student's t-test. The level of significance was set at p < 0.05. Data are presented as means ± SEM for all groups.

Cultured human muscle fibers Primary cultures of normal human muscle were established from satellite cells of portions of diagnostic muscle biopsies from patients who, after all tests were performed, were considered free of muscle disease (Askanas and Engel 1992;Askanas et al. 1996b). Experiments were performed on seven culture sets, each established from a different muscle biopsy. All experimental conditions were studied on sister cultures in the same culture sets. Three-week-old cultured muscle fibers were treated for 24 h with either (i) one of two wellknown ER stress inducers, N-glycosylation inhibitor tunicamycin (4 lg/mL) or an inhibitor of ER-calcium-ATPase thapsigargin (300 nM) (Back et al. 2005;Lee 2005) (both from Sigma Co, St. Louis, MO, USA) or (ii) epoxomicin (1 lM) (Biomol Research Laboratories, Plymouth Meeting, PA, USA), a specific and irreversible proteasome inhibitor (Meng et al. 1999). After treatment, control and experimental cultures were fixed for immunostainings, harvested for immunoblot studies, or used for RNA isolation.

Light-microscopic immunocytochemistry

Single and double immunofluorescence on paraformaldehyde-fixed cultures was performed as described (Askanas et al. 1996b(Askanas et al. , 1997;;Fratta et al. 2005).

Immunoblotting

Cultured cells were harvested in ristocetin-induced platelet agglutination (RIPA) buffer containing phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride and a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Diagnostic). The immunoblotting procedure was performed as described above for muscle biopsies.

Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and northern blots

Total RNA from control and experimental cultures was extracted using RNA-bee reagent (Tel Tech, Friendwood, TX, USA). After treatment with Dnase I, 150 ng of RNA was used for one-step synthesis of cDNA and the multiplex PCR reaction (Qiagen). The optimized conditions were 30 min at 50°C, 15 min at 95°C followed by 28 cycles of amplification (94°C for 30 s, 60°C for 30 s, 72°C for 90 s), and the final incubation of 10 min at 72°C.

For northern blots, aliquots of RNA (10 lg) isolated from experimental and control cultures were denatured and subjected to electrophoresis in 1% agarose gel containing 0.41 M formaldehyde. After electropheretic fractionation, RNA was transferred overnight to a positively charged nylon membrane by capillary blotting and fixed by UV light. A Herp-specific probe was generated by PCR and fluorescein-labelled (Kokame et al. 2000). Hybridization and detection procedures using anti-fluorescein-AP conjugate were performed as described (Kokame et al. 2000).

Statistical analysis

The statistical analysis was as described above.

Results

Muscle biopsies

Light-microscopic immunocytochemistry

In all s-IBM muscle biopsies, 70-80% of the vacuolated muscle fibers contained, mainly in their non-vacuolated cytoplasm, numerous various-sized aggregates immunoreactive with antibodies against Herp (Figs 1a-c). Approximately 25% of non-vacuolated muscle fibers also contained similar aggregates. By double immunofluorescence, Herp immunoreactive aggregates co-localized with Ab (Figs 1d and e), ubiquitin (Figs 1f and g), b2 proteasome subunit (Figs 1h  and i), and BiP/GRP78 (Figs 1j and k). None of the control non-s-IBM, diseased or normal, human muscle biopsies had muscle fibers containing aggregates immunoreactive with anti-Herp antibody. Eliminating the primary antibodies or replacing them with non-relevant antibodies resulted in nonstaining.

Gold-immuno-electronmicroscopy

Immunoreactive Herp was associated with Ab, 20S b2 proteasome subunit, and BiP/GRP78 within the same structures, namely the 6-10 nm fibrils and amorphous and floccular material (Fig. 2). Herp was not associated with paired helical filaments, which are known to contain phosphorylated tau in IBM muscle fibers (Mirabella et al. 1996). 

Immunoblots

In normal and s-IBM muscle, Herp migrated as a single 54 kDa band (Fig. 3a), and its expression was much stronger in s-IBM muscle as compared to controls. Omission of the primary antibody resulted in no bands being present (Fig. 3b). Figure 3(c) provides analysis of the data derived from densitometric scans (obtained from seven samples), normalized to b-actin and expressed in arbitrary units. These data indicate that in s-IBM muscle biopsies Herp protein was increased eight-fold (p < 0.05) as compared to controls.

RNA expression by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction

As determined by RT-PCR analysis, Herp mRNA was prominently increased in s-IBM as compared to controls (Figs 3d and e).

Cultured human muscle fibers

Light-microscopic immunocytochemistry

In control fibers, Herp immunoreactivity was only weak and diffuse (Fig. 4a). ER stress-induced cultured human muscle fibers had strong and diffuse Herp immunoreactivity (Figs 4b and c). In contrast, approximately 80% of the epoxomicin-treated muscle fibers had the Herp protein immunoreactivity in the form of large aggregates ( Figs 4d,  e, and g), which co-localized with ubiquitin immunoreactivity (Figs 4f and h).

Immunoblots

Treatment with ER-stress inducers or with epoxomicin prominently increased the Herp protein level as illustrated by two representative culture sets (Fig. 5a). Figure 5(b) provides densitometric analysis of the data from seven Fig. 2 Double-label gold-immuno-electronmicroscopy in sporadic inclusion-body myositis muscle fibers. This illustrates that both homocysteine-induced endoplasmic reticulum protein (Herp) (5 nm gold particles) and amyloid-b (Ab) (15 nm gold particles) are associated with 6-10 nm fibrils (a) and floccular material (c). Similarly, Herp (5 nm gold) and b2 20S proteasome subunit (15 nm gold) (b, d) and Herp (5 nm gold) and BiP/GRP78 (15 nm gold) (e, f) are associated with the same 6-10 nm fibrils and floccular material. Magnification: a, c-f,

• 51 000; b, • 60 000. BiP/GRP78, immunoglobulin heavy chainbinding protein/glucose-regulated protein 78; b2Ps, b2 20S proteasome subunit; Ub, ubiquitin.

experimental sets, normalized to b-actin. Thapsigargin, the strongest Herp-inducer, increased Herp about 15-fold (p < 0.01). Tunicamycin and epoxomicin increased Herp six-fold (p < 0.01) and 10-fold (p < 0.05), respectively (Fig. 5b). In some thapsigargin, tunicamycin, or epoxomicin treated cultures, additional bands lower than 54 kDa were occasionally observed (not shown). This suggests, as shown previously in PC12 cells (Chan et al. 2004), that under certain experimental conditions, some cleavage of Herp can also occur in cultured muscle fibers.

Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and northern blotting analysis

To investigate the molecular basis of Herp protein increase, semiquantitative multiplex RT-PCR analysis was performed. Those studies indicated in each experiment that thapsigargin and tunicamycin increased Herp mRNA, whereas epoxomicin appeared to slightly decrease it (Figs 5c and d). The above data were confirmed by northern blots (Fig. 5e).

Discussion

We investigated expression of Herp in normal and diseased human muscle, and studied the mechanisms of Herp regulation in cultured human muscle fibers. We report that in s-IBM muscle fibers, Herp was accumulated in varioussized multifocal aggregates, wherein it co-localized with Ab, ER chaperone BiP/GRP78, and 20S b2 proteasome subunit, by both light-and electronmicroscopic immunocytochemistry.

In addition, Herp protein and its mRNA were prominently increased in s-IBM muscle fibers. Even though normal human muscle fibers had, on immunoblots, a definite band of Herp, neither in them nor in several non-s-IBM diseased human muscle biopsies was Herp discerned immunocytochemically by light-microscopy. Previous studies have shown Herp mRNA expression in various human organs, including skeletal muscle (Kokame et al. 2000), but they did not study Herp protein.  Our studies, based on experimentally modified cultured human muscle, demonstrated two distinct mechanisms of Herp increase in normal human muscle, and they seem directly relevant to s-IBM muscle fibers. Specifically, two ER-stress inducers, tunicamycin and thapsigargin, each increased Herp transcription and translation, which resulted in very strong and diffuse immunoreactivity of its protein. However, proteasome inhibition by epoxomicin increased the amount of Herp total protein without increasing its transcription, and produced striking aggregations of Herp, which, similarly to the s-IBM muscle biopsies, were associated with ubiquitin. As ER-stress and proteasome inhibition are present in s-IBM muscle fibers, we propose that those two mechanisms contribute to the demonstrated Herp abnormalities in s-IBM muscle fibers.

Even though Herp is considered the most inducible protein during ER-stress (Yamamoto et al. 2004), its exact relationship to the ER-stress is not well understood. Accumulation of unfolded/misfolded proteins in the ER induces ER-stress, which activates three pathways of the UPR, the role of which is to mitigate the ER-stress. One pathway involves preferential translation of transcription-factor ATF4 (Shen et al. 2004;Schroder and Kaufman 2005). The Herp promoter contains ER-stress-responsive elements, including a cisacting element recognized by ATF4 (Ma and Hendershot 2004;Yamamoto et al. 2004). Our preliminary data (not shown) indicate that ATF4 is increased in s-IBM muscle fibers, suggesting that ATF4 may be involved in overexpression of Herp. Whether other transcription factors, such as ATF6 or X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP-1), participate in Herp induction in s-IBM muscle fibers and in our culture model is not known. Thus, the exact pathways that contribute to Herp activation in s-IBM muscle fibers remain to be studied.

The half-life of Herp is considered to be very short (2.5 h) (Sai et al. 2003). Its ubiquitin-like domain (ULD) is responsible for its rapid degradation via the 26S proteasome (Sai et al. 2003). Because 26S proteasome activity is inhibited in s-IBM muscle fibers (Fratta et al. 2005), this inhibition may contribute to the total increase of Herp protein, as well as its accumulation in the form of ubiquitinassociated aggregates.

We have also shown other proteins accumulated and aggregated in s-IBM muscle fibers and in our proteasomeinhibited cultures of human muscle fibers (Fratta et al. 2005). As Herp was proposed to be linked to both UPR and ERAD (Yamamoto et al. 2004;Schroder and Kaufman 2005), its co-localization with BiP/GRP78, 20S proteasome, and Ab in s-IBM muscle fibers might suggest that Herp in s-IBM is involved in attempted proper folding of proteins and in the pathway of proteasomal removal of improperly folded ones.

Herp has been previously shown to influence processing of amyloid-b precursor protein (AbPP) and Ab production through its binding to presenilin 1 (Sai et al. 2002). Presenilin 1 is increased in s-IBM muscle fibers (Askanas et al. 1998), but our present studies did not address the question of whether Herp participates in AbPP processing and Ab production in s-IBM muscle fibers or in our cultured human muscle fibers.

A role of Herp in preventing ER-stress-induced apoptotic cell death in non-muscle cells (Chan et al. 2004;Hori et al. 2004) is of interest regarding s-IBM muscle fibers. s-IBM fibers do not exhibit features of apoptosis (Behrens et al. 1997;Askanas and Engel 2001), despite intracellular existence of several factors, such as increased Ab, oxidative stress, and mitochondrial abnormalities (Askanas andEngel 2001, 2003) known to induce apoptosis in other cells (Loo et al. 1993;Simonian and Coyle 1996;Parone et al. 2002). We have previously proposed that the multinucleated muscle fibers do not undergo classic apoptosis (Broccolini et al. 1999;Askanas and Engel 2001). In s-IBM muscle fibers, survival motor neuron (SMN) factor and IAP-like protein were previously proposed to play an anti-apoptotic role (Broccolini et al. 2000;Li and Dalakas 2000;Askanas and Engel 2001). Based on our current data, it is possible that Herp might also contribute to the anti-apoptotic milieu in s-IBM muscle fibers, as was shown in relation to other cells (Chan et al. 2004;Hori et al. 2004).

Conclusion

Our novel findings related to the increase of Herp and its abnormal multifocal accumulation in s-IBM muscle fibers are reported. We demonstrate, for the first time, that two different mechanisms are involved in Herp regulation and accumulation in human muscle fibers. We suggest that Herp, amelioratively, might be facilitating the unfolded protein response and attempting to enhance the ER-associated protein degradation of malfolded proteins in s-IBM muscle fibers. Nevertheless, despite the existence in the s-IBM muscle fibers of Herp and components of the unfolded protein response that are putatively protective, s-IBM is a severely progressive degenerative disease, probably because the factors causing progressive degeneration are more influential than those having a putative protective influence. Accordingly, developing methods that would further up-regulate the protective factors might lead to novel therapeutic avenues.

Acknowledgements

Supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (AG16768 Merit Award), the Myositis Association, the Muscular Dystrophy Association (to VA), and the Helen Lewis Research Fund. Maggie Baburyan provided excellent technical assistance in electronmicroscopy.

Fig. 11Fig. 1 Immunofluorescence within sporadic inclusion-body myositis muscle fibers. (a-c) Single-label immunofluorescence illustrates immunoreactivity of homocysteine-induced endoplasmic reticulum protein (Herp) in the form of various-sized aggregates. Double-label immunofluorescence illustrates that Herp immunoreactive inclusions

Fig. 44Fig. 4 Immunofluorescence in cultured human muscle fibers. Singlelabel immunofluorescence of homocysteine-induced endoplasmic reticulum protein (Herp) (a-d) shows very weak, barely detectable immunoreactivity in a control (a) cultured muscle fiber. Strong and diffuse immunoreactivity was present in cultures treated with endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress inducers thapsigargin (b) and tunica-

Fig. 33Fig. 3 Immunoblots and RT-PCR in control and sporadic inclusionbody myositis (s-IBM) samples. (a) Immunoblots of muscle homogenates of normal-control (C) and s-IBM muscle biopsies demonstrate much stronger expression of homocysteine-induced endoplasmic reticulum protein (Herp) in s-IBM. The actin bands indicate protein loading in each sample. (b) Omission of the primary anti-Herp antibody resulted in no bands. (c) Densitometric analysis of the blots performed using NIH Image J 1.310 indicates that in s-IBM muscle biopsies Herp protein was eight-fold increased as compared to controls. Data are

Fig. 55Fig. 5 Immunoblots, RT-PCR, and northern blotting in cultured human muscle fibers. (a) Immunoblots of two representative culture sets show the increase of homocysteine-induced endoplasmic reticulum protein (Herp) in thapsigargin (Tg), tunicamycin (Tm), and epoxomicin (Epox) treated cultured human muscle fibers as compared to controls (C). (b) Densitometric analysis of blots in (a), analyzed using NIH Image J 1.310, shows that thapsigargin, tunicamycin, and epoxomicin prominently increased Herp protein. Data were obtained from seven independent experimental sets of cultured human muscle, and are presented as the mean ± SEM of fold increase. Significance was determined by t-test. The level of significance was set at p < 0.05. (c) Representative agarose gel electrophoresis of products corresponding

