Therapeutic targets in patients with inflammatory myopathies: Present approaches and a look to the future

Clinical characteristics

The inflammatory myopathies comprise three major and distinct subsets: Polymyositis (PM), Dermatomyositis (DM), and Inclusion-Body Myositis (IBM) [1][2][3][4][5]. Although the presence of moderate to severe muscle weakness and endomysial inflammation are common features in all these conditions, unique clinical, immunopathologic, and histologic criteria, along with different prognosis and response to therapies, characterize each subset.

Dermatomyositis develops subacutely and affects skin and proximal muscles. The skin manifestations accompany or precede muscle weakness and include a heliotrope rash (blue-purple discoloration) on the upper eyelids with edema; a flat red rash on the face, knees, elbows, malleoli, neck, anterior chest, back, and shoulders; and a raised, violaceous, scaly eruption (Gottron rash) at the knuckles. Dilated capillary loops at the base of the fingernails with irregular, thickened, and distorted cuticles, or cracked, 'dirty' horizontal lines at the lateral and palmar areas of the fingers (mechanic's hands) are characteristic for the disease. Polymyositis has a subacute onset and selectively affects the proximal muscles but spares the skin. Unlike DM, in which the rash secures early recognition, PM has an onset that cannot be easily determined; the disease may exist for several months before the patient seeks medical advice. IBM has a slow onset and progression, affects both the proximal and the distal muscles, and results in significant weakness and atrophy. The muscles of swallowing are also affected and choking episodes are frequent. Although IBM is commonly suspected when a patient with presumed PM does not respond to therapy, involvement of distal muscles, especially foot extensors and deep finger flexors, in almost all cases may be a clue to early diagnosis. The weakness and atrophy may be asymmetric, with selective involvement of the quadriceps, iliopsoas, triceps, biceps, and forearm flexor muscles. Patients with IBM account for the majority of the patients above the age of 50 referred to as 'polymyositis unresponsive to therapy'.

The diagnosis of these disorders is based on the combination of serum muscle enzymes, electromyography, and muscle biopsy. The CK is elevated in all three subsets, but it can be normal or only slightly elevated in DM and IBM. The EMG is myopathic. The muscle biopsy is characterized by endomysial inflammation but has unique features in each case; in DM, the inflammation is perivascular or at the periphery of the fascicle and is often associated with perifascicular atrophy; in PM and IBM, the inflammation is in the endomysial parenchyma and sensitized T cell invade healthy-appearing muscle fibers; in IBM, many muscle fibers not invaded by cells [6] contain vacuoles and tiny deposits of amyloid and amyloid-related proteins [7,8].

Identification of specific therapeutic targets in PM, DM, IBM

To identify and understand the specific therapeutic targets in inflammatory myopathies, it is essential to review the main immunopathologic events responsible for these disorders.

Dermatomyositis: a complement-mediated microangiopathy

In DM, the inflammatory cells are predominantly perivascular or in the interfascicular septae and around, rather than within the fascicles [1][2][3][4][5]. The intramuscular capillaries show endothelial hyperplasia with tubuloreticular profiles, vacuolization, and necrosis, leading to ischemia and muscle fiber destruction, often seen in groups (microinfarcts) or at the periphery of the fascicle (perifascicular atrophy). The earliest immunopathologic changes, preceding inflammation or structural alterations, consist of complement activation and deposition of C3b, C4b, and C5b-9 membranolytic attack complex (MAC), the lytic component of the complement pathway, on the endomysial capillaries leading to destruction of capillaries, muscle ischemia, and compensatory dilatation of the lumen of the remaining capillaries [9][10][11] (Fig. 1). The perifascicular atrophy is probably due to endofascicular hypoperfusion which is prominent distally. These fibers express various markers including MHC-I, N-CAM, bAPP, cathepsin-L, calpain, the Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription I (STAT-I), and the MxA protein, induced respectively by g and a/b-interferon [12][13][14], indicating a stressor effect and a prominent local inflammatory response (Fig. 1).

The factors that activate the complement and the antigenic targets on the endothelium remain unknown. The lymphocytic infiltrates, prominent in the perimysial and perivascular regions, consist of B cells, CD4C cells, and plasmacytoid/dendritic cells, supporting the humoralmediated process. The plasmacytoid/dendritic cells are positive for interferon-a and may be a major source of interferon-a secretion [15]. The complement activation upregulates cytokines, chemokines, and adhesion molecules which, in turn, facilitate T-and B-cell transmigration. Collectively, three sequential processes exert a combined effect in the muscle microenvironment, as confirmed by gene array studies [16]: an inflammatory cascade mediated by complement deposition in the microvasculature and facilitated by secretion of interferon-a/b and g, cytokines, chemokines and transcription factors; an ischemic process resulting from the reduction of capillary network; and a muscle degenerative/regenerative cascade.

Polymyositis and IBM: A T-cell-mediated cytotoxic process

In PM and IBM, the primary effector cells mediating muscle fiber injury are CD8C cells that surround and invade MHC-I-antigen-expressing, non-necrotic, muscle fibers [1][2][3][4][5]17,18]. In IBM, in addition to T-cell-mediated cytotoxicity, there is vacuolar formation and cytoplasmic accumulation of filamentous inclusions that immunoreact with various amyloid-related proteins [7,8]. The MHC-I/ CD8 complex forms an immunological synapse between muscle and CD8CT cells identical in PM and IBM [4], characterized by the following (Fig. 2).

MHC-I antigen expression

Muscle fibers normally do not express Major Histocompatibility (MHC) class-I. In PM and sIBM however, MHC-I is ubiquitously expressed even on muscle fibers remote from the inflammation [19,20]. The MHC-I upregulation is specific for PM and IBM because in other chronic myopathies or dystrophies it is absent or only present in Fig. 1. Sequence of immunopathological changes in dermatomyositis. The disease probably begins with activation of complement and formation of C3 through the classic or alternative pathway probably by antibodies against endothelial cells. Activated C3 leads to formation of C3b, C3bNEO, and membranolytic attack complex (MAC) which is deposited in and around the endothelial cell wall of the endomysial capillaries. Deposition of MAC leads to destruction and reduced number of capillaries, with ischemia or microinfarcts most prominent in the periphery of the fascicle. Finally, a smaller than normal number of capillaries with a dilated diameter remain and perifascicular atrophy ensues. Not only B cells but also CD4 C T cells, CD8CT cells and macrophages traffic to the muscle. The migration of cells from the circulation is facilitated by the vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM) and intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM) whose expression on the endothelial cells is upregulated by the released cytokines. T cells and macrophages through their integrins very late activation antigen (VLA)-4 and leukocyte function-associated antigen (LFA)-1, bind to the VCAM and ICAM and transgress to the muscle through the endothelial cell wall. The perifascicular atrophic fibers express STAT-I, cathepsin, TGF-b, MxA, MHC-I and NCAM suggesting of regeneration/degeneration and a local inflammatory response mediated by interferon.

degenerating/regenerating fibers. Further, in dystrophies the few autoinvasive T cells are clonally diverse and do not express activation or cytotoxicity markers. Cytokines may be the main inducers of MHC-I expression because in human myotubes, MHC-I is upregulated by proinflammatory cytokines [21]. In PM and IBM, the chronic upregulation of MHC-I exerts a stressor effect in the Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER), and activates the nuclear factor kB which promote inflammatory-mediator genes for cytokines and chemokines that may lead to a self-sustaining endomysial inflammatory response [22].

Autoinvasive cytotoxic T cells

The autoinvasive CD8C cells are activated, expressing CD45RO, ICAM-I, MHC-I, and ICOS [2,3]. These cells are also cytotoxic containing perforin and granzyme granules which upon release induce muscle fiber necrosis [23,24]. The perforin pathway, and not the Fas-Fas-L-dependent apoptotic process, is the cytotoxic effector mechanism, in spite of Fas antigen expression on muscle fibers and Fas-L on T cells [25]. Whether the co-expression of the antiapoptotic molecules Bcl-2 [25], FLICE [Fas-associated death domain-like IL1-Converting Enzyme-Inhibitory Protein (FLIP)] [26], and human IAP-like protein (hILP) [27], confers resistance of muscle to Fas-mediated apoptosis, remains speculative.

Clonally expanded autoinvasive CD8C cells

T cells recognize an antigen via the complementary CDR3 determining region of the T Cell Receptors (TCR), a heterodimer of two a and b chains, encoded by genes in the V-J and V-D-J segments of the TCR gene. When T cells are selectively recruited by specific autoantigens, the TCR genes are restricted and the amino acid sequence in the CDR3 region is conserved [28]. In PM and IBM, but not DM or dystrophies, only certain T cells of specific TCR families are recruited to the muscle from the circulation [2,4,29]. Further, the autoinvasive, but not the perivascular, T cells are clonally expanded, demonstrating restricted use of the Jb genes and conserved amino acid sequence in the CDR3 region. These cells are also cytotoxic expressing perforin and may persist over time [30][31][32][33][34][35][36][37].

Costimulatory molecules

The MHC-I presents antigenic peptides to TCR of CD8C cells only in the presence of costimulatory molecules [B7-1, B7-2, BB1, and ICOS-L (Inducible-Costimulator-Ligand)], CD40 and their counterreceptors CD28, CTLA-4, ICOS, and CD40L. In PM and sIBM, BB1, ICOS-L, and CD-40 are expressed on MHC-I-positive muscle fibers and make cellto-cell contact with their respective ligands CD28, CTLA-4, ICOS or CD40L on CD8C cells [38][39][40]. The BB1 and ICOS-L are functional molecules, induced by interferon-g or TNF-a on human myoblasts, and confer APC function on the muscle fibers [18].

T-cell transmigration, cytokine signaling, and chemokine receptors in DM, PM, IBM

Cytokines (IL 1 , IL 2 , IL 5 , IL 10 , TNF-a, TGF-b) and chemokines (MCP-1a, MIP-1a, Mig, IP-10) are variably overexpressed in PM, DM, and IBM and may contribute to costimulation, T-cell activation, and transmigration [41][42][43][44][45][46]. Cytokines induce in human myotubes the synthesis of TGF-b, MCP-I, MIP-1a, IL 1b , and AbPP and may contribute to persistence of the inflammatory response. Fig. 2. Molecules, receptors and their ligands involved in the transgression of T cells through the endothelial cell wall and recognition of antigens on muscle fibers. LFA-I/ICAM-I binding and TCR scanning for antigen initiates the formation of an immunological synapse. Stimulation is supported and enhanced by the engagement of BB1, ICOS-L, CD40, and perhaps additional co-stimulatory molecules, with their ligands CD28, CTLA, ICOS and CD40L. Metalloproteinases facilitate the migration of T cells and their attachment to the muscle surface. Muscle fiber necrosis occurs via the perforin granules released by the autoaggressive T cells. A direct myocytotoxic effect exerted by the released IFN-g, IL1 or TNF-a may also play a role. Death of the muscle fiber is mediated by a form of necrosis rather than apoptosis, via the perforin secreted by the autoinvasive cytotoxic T cells.

The chemokine receptors, CCR1-CCR5 and CCR2A, CCR2B are upregulated on the endothelium and inflammatory cells, enhancing the local immune circuitry. Adhesion molecules and their ligands such as VCAM, ICAM-1, LFA-I, VLA-4, and metalloproteinases [41][42][43][44][45][46][47] are also overexpressed on the endothelium or activated T cells and facilitate the transmigration of lymphocytes toward the muscle fibers (Figs. 1 and 2).

A combined autoimmune and vacuolization/ degenerative process coexists in IBM

In spite of the relative resistance of IBM to conventional immunotherapies, its immunopathology is identical to PM as summarized by the following: (a) association with other autoimmune diseases and autoantibodies in frequency similar to that seen in classic autoimmune disorders, such as MG [48]; (b) occurrence in family members of the same generation (familial inflammatory IBM), as seen with other autoimmune disorders [49]; (c) strong immunogenetic association [48,50]; (d) association with common variable immunodeficiency and Natural Killer cells [51]; (e) association with paraproteinemias, in up to 22.8%, much beyond the 2% frequency found in age-matched controls, suggesting disturbed immunoregulation [52]; (f) the autoinvasive T cells are antigen-driven and form an immunological synapse, identical to PM as described above; (g) occurrence of IBM with unexpected frequency in patients with retroviral infection [53]; and (h) strong upregulation of cytokines, chemokines, and their receptors at the protein, mRNA, and gene level.

A degenerative process in IBM is supported by the presence of vacuoles (almost always in fibers non-invaded by T cells) along with deposits of beta amyloid within the vacuolated muscle fibers which immunoreact for amyloid precursor protein (APP), chymotrypsin, presinilin I, apolipoprotein E, phosphorylated tau, and others [7]. It remains unclear whether these deposits directly contribute to disease pathogenesis or are secondary phenomena. Vacuoles are observed in several myopathies, such as hereditary IBM due to GNE mutations, x-linked Emery-Dreifus muscular dystrophy, rigid-spine syndrome, other proximal, and distal myopathies such as myofibrillar myopathies or dysferlinopathies, and even in chronic neurogenic conditions such as post-polio [53]. The intracellular accumulation of amyloid-related proteins AbPP, phosphorylated tau, presenilin-1, apolipoprotein-E, g-Tubulin, Clusterin, a-synuclein, gelsolin, oxidative stress proteins, and all the components of the catalytic core of the proteasomes have not been only observed in sIBM but also in other myopathies [8,53], leading to the suggestion that these accumulations are not unique to s-IBM but may be sequelae of a stress response within the myofiber [22]. The relative resistance of IBM to conventional immunotherapies (see below) is analogous to the experience in primary progressive multiple sclerosis where autoimmune and degenerative features coexist from the outset and the disease is resistant to available therapies.

Immunotherapeutic targets in DM, PM, IBM

Based on the information described above and illustrated in Figs. 1 and 2, the immunotherapies for inflammatory myopathies can be divided into three major categories:

(1) Selective, antigen-specific immunotherapies target the trimolecular complex (TMC) of T-cell stimulation, which is part of the 'immunological synapse' [54][55][56].

In principle, each component of the TMC depicted in Fig. 2, can be targeted [56]. The major histocompatibility (MHC) molecule could be blocked by anti-MHC antibodies or 'blocking peptides'; the antigen (or antigenic peptide) could be applied in such a way that the autoreactive T cells are inhibited rather than stimulated; and the T-cell receptor (TCR) could be targeted with anti-TCR antibodies or by T-cell or TCR peptide vaccination [56]. Although such antigenselective immunotherapy may seem very promising, it poses a number of special problems that render its application impractical or unrealistic at the present time predominantly because the antigen is unknown. Another serious concern is that such immunotherapy needs to be tailored to individual patients, because the T-cell response to various autoantigens is very complex. Furthermore, there is growing evidence that the autoimmune response is not static but dynamic, spreading overtime to include new autoantigens ('epitope spreading'). (2) Semi-specific therapies using agents and biologicals aimed at various targets of the immunopathological network, depicted in Figs.  2). Agents targeting these molecules are mostly monoclonal antibodies that act as specific missiles to hit their target. As such, they have less severe long-term side effects. These agents are not specific for PM, DM, or IBM and, although they are only targeting one specific component (i.e. transduction molecules involved in T-cell activation, one cytokine or adhesion molecule), they have proven to be highly effective in modifying the immune response. The only biological agent that affects several of these targets simultaneously, is IVIg, which works synergistically to inhibit complement, T-cell transmigration, cytokines and autoantibodies, as described later. (3) Conventional, non-specific immunosuppressive or antiinflammatory therapies that include: Steroids; Azathioprine, Mycophenolate, Methotrexate, Cyclophosphamide and Cyclosporin.

4. Semi-specific immunotherapy in PM, DM, IBM: present and future (Table 1)

Against intracellular signalling pathways associated with antigen recognition and costimulation

The TCR interaction with antigen/MHC activates intracellular phosphotyrosine kinases (p56,ZAP-70) that mediate signalling via phosphorylation of immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMS) and transduction molecules such as CD52 (Fig. 3) [54][55][56][57]. Blockade of the CD52 molecules can be accomplished using the specific monoclonal antibody Alemtuzumab (CAMPATH) (1, in Fig. 3), which causes a long-lasting lymphocyte depletion via apoptosis [58]. CAMPATH is currently tried in IBM patients at the NIH (Dalakas MC: principal investigator). Up to this writing, eight IBM patients have completed the trial. T-cell activation is increased via costimulatory factors delivered by LFA 1 /ICAM or LFA 3 /CD2 interaction. These interactions can be blocked by two currently available monoclonal antibodies, one against LFA3,(Alefacept) that has an effective downregulatory role on memory T cells and cytokine production; and another against LFA-1[(Efalizumab) Raptiva], which blocks reactivation of memory T cells (2,3 in Fig. 3) [59,60]. Several monoclonal antibodies against co-stimulatory molecules, such as anti-CTLA-4, are aggressively pursued for various autoimmune disorders and transplantation. Although preliminary results are encouraging, none of these agents is currently on the market and approved for any indication.

The TCR engagement and co-stimulation activates also downstream substrates increasing the intracellular calcium concentration, which activates the phosphatase calcineurin. Calcineurin dephosphorylates the Nuclear Factor of Activated T cells (NFAT) and enables it to enter the nucleus where it binds to IL2 promoter to induce specific gene transcription that lead to cell proliferation and differentiation [54][55][56]. The IL2 receptors can be effectively inhibited by the monoclonal antibody Daclizumab, which binds to CD25 (IL-2 receptor antagonist) and inhibits T-cell proliferation (4 in Fig. 3). Daclizumab is very well tolerated and in two trials has been very promising in patients with multiple sclerosis [61]. It is an excellent agent to be considered for DM and IBM patients.

Binding of interleukin 2 to the receptor, activates intracellular signaling cascade via janus kinases (JAK1, JAK3) and subsequent phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) proteins. The drugs Cyclosporin that bind to cytophilin, and Tacrolimus that binds to FK-binding protein inactivate calcineurin and prevent IL2 transcription and IL2-induced T-cell proliferation [54,62] (5,6 in Fig. 3). Tacrolimus and Cyclosporin, by inhibiting the calcineurin phosphatase activity, have shown promise in some difficult cases of inflammatory myopathies. However, Tacrolimus appears more potent because it binds with greater affinity to FkBP and may be preferable. Also, it is less likely to cause hypertension and cosmetic problems but could cause diabetes in the elderly. In several small series of PM and DM patients, Tacrolimus has shown to be effective as a steroid-sparing agent in some patients [63][64][65]. A controlled study has not been done.

Another currently available agent that acts downstream via a calcineurim-independent pathway to prevent the translation of mRNA for key cytokines involved in T-cell signalling is Rapamycin. Rapamycin binds to a kinase called Target of Rapamycin (TOR) via the FK-506 binding protein (FkBP) and inhibits the intracellular signaling disks from the IL2R, thereby inhibiting progression of activated T cells to the S phase of the cell cycle (7 in Fig. 3) [54]. Following progression into the cell cycle, T-cell proliferation ensues. Rapamycin differs therefore from Tacrolimus and Cyclosporin because it does not inhibit calcineurin or cytokine transcription but prevents translation. Preliminary results  using Rapamycin appear promising in patients with DM resistant to other therapies [66].

The drug Mycophenolate mofetil inhibits de novo purine biosynthesis of T and B cells [54,67]. Since lymphocytes rely exclusively on the novo purine synthesis pathway for the nucleotides necessary for DNA production, this drug affects activated T cells (8 in Fig. 3). Azathioprine also acts on the de novo purine biosynthesis required by T cells. Whether Mycophenolate is superior to Azathioprine is unclear but it is better tolerated without overt signs of hepatotoxicity. Further, it can be safely used in patients taking Allopurinol. The advantage of Mycophenolate is also its faster mode of action (within a week to 3 months) compared to Azathioprine that takes 6 months. Anecdotal reports suggest effectiveness of Mycophenolate in Inclusion Body Myositis [68].

Another similar agent is the anti-thymocyte globulin (ATG), which is a potent polyclonal antibody against T cells. ATG binds to multiple epitopes on the T-cell surface and induces apoptosis and complement-mediated lysis. It was recently shown that ATG is promising in patients with IBM [69] indicating that potent immunomodulating agents could be a means of suppressing this disease.

Against autoantibodies and B cells

These therapies are applicable in DM where a humoralmediated process is implicated (Fig. 1). Immunosuppression, by affecting B cells and autoantibodies can be effectively achieved in DM patients using two agents: IVIg and a monoclonal antibody against CD20 (Rituximab).

(a) IVIg. The IgG of normal humans contains low titer antibodies against a wide spectrum of human proteins, and anti-idiotypic antibodies directed against Fab, the antigen-binding region of these autoantibodies [70][71][72]. Since IVIg preparations are derived from a large pool of human donors, the IgG molecules within the IVIg contain antibodies with a wide range of idiotypic and anti-idiotypic specificities. The larger the pool of donors, the higher the number of the F(ab 0 ) 2 dimeric pairs and the wider the expected spectrum of idiotypic-anti-idiotypic specificities. The infused IVIg, by supplying idiotypic antibodies, neutralizes the pathogenic autoantibodies, thereby preventing their interaction with the autoantigen. Although in DM a pathogenic antibody has not been found, the presence of B cells and plasmacytoid cells within the infiltrates are probably secreting pathogenic immunoglobulins. Whether these putative antibodies are responsible for complement fixation and activation is unclear. The anti-idiotypic antibodies within IVIg may also affect antibody production by exerting negative signals on B cells when bound to antigenic determinants on the surface of the IgM or IgG molecules on B cells. IVIg is clearly effective in DM based on a controlled trial [12].

As stated earlier, it works in several areas of the immune network, one of them being the B cells and autoantibodies. (b) Rituximab. This is a monoclonal antibody that causes depletion of CD20CB cells, but not plasma cells. B cells are not only responsible for antibody production but also for complement activation, antigen presentation, and cytokine production. Consequently, Rituximab, by depleting B cells, can affect a number of the above factors not only in patients with DM but also in patients with PM and IBM. Preliminary studies have shown effectiveness of Rituximab in DM patients [73].

A multicenter controlled study in PM and DM funded by the NIH will begin shortly.

Anti-complement agents

(a) IVIg. This is the most effective agent in inhibiting complement activation. The effect of IVIg on complement binding has been demonstrated in vitro, in animal models, and in patients who received IVIg. In early studies, IVIg was shown to prevent death in guinea pigs from the complement-dependent Forssman shock by inhibiting the uptake of complement C 3 and C 4 fragments to the endothelial cells [74]. In patients with dermatomyositis, which is a complement-dependent microangiopathy mediated by activation of C3 and deposition of MAC on the endomysial capillaries, IVIg was not only shown to be clinically effective, but also shown to inhibit complement uptake and intercept the formation and deposition of MAC on the endomysial capillaries [69,70,74]. Post-IVIg, but not post-placebo serum, inhibited the uptake of C3b and C4b fragments by sensitized in vitro targets, probably due to formation of covalent or noncovalent complexes between C3 and specific receptor sites within the infused IgG molecules [74]. Such an inhibition limits the available C3 molecules for further incorporation into the C5 convertase assembly, thereby preventing the formation and in situ deposition of MAC. This was confirmed in the repeated muscle biopsy specimens of patients with dermatomyositis treated with IVIg when no MAC deposits were noted [74]. (b) A monoclonal antibody against C 5 (Eculizumab). This is a humanized monoclonal antibody that inhibits C 5 and blocks its cleavage and subsequent generation of proinflammatory molecules along with the terminal formation of membranolytic attack complex. This antibody, tested in various trials, is now undergoing clinical trials in DM patients [75].

Modulation of the Fc receptors

The only available agent capable of affecting Fc receptors on macrophages is IVIg. There are specific Fc receptors for each class of immunoglobulin. IgG molecules bind through their Fc region of Fcg receptors on hematopoietic cells, such as macrophages. FcgR receptors with intracellular 'immune receptor tyrosine-based activation or inhibition motifs' mediate inflammation or immune effector functions via activation or inhibitory signaling [72]. The ratio of expression of the inhibitory and activation FcgR receptors determines the final immune response; overexpression of FcgR I and FcgR III favor activation, whereas overexpression of FcgR II infers inhibition of phagocytosis and interception of antibodydependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity. In PM and IBM, a modulation of the Fc receptors on the macrophages could inhibit the macrophage-mediated phagocytosis of muscle fibers. This action may contribute to the effect of IVIg in DM and PM.

Against immunomodulating cytokines and chemokines

(a) IVIg. In vitro and in vivo studies have shown that IVIg causes a dose-dependent downregulation of tissue expression or reduction in the circulating levels of cytokines and adhesion molecules, such as IL I , TNFa , IL 1b , TGF-b, and TGF-b mRNA, MHC-I, ICAM-I on the endothelial cells and lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1 (LFA-1) on activated T-cells. The latter has been convincingly shown in the repeated muscle biopsies of patients with dermatomyositis who improved after IVIg therapy [70,71]. Metalloproteinases (MMP-2, MMP-9), which are upregulated in inflammatory myopathies and facilitate T-cell activation and transmigration [47], are also downregulated after treatment with IVIg at the protein and mRNA level (Choi Y and Dalakas MC, unpublished observations) in the muscles of DM patients who improved. (b) Anti-TNF-a strategies. TNF-a is not only upregulated in the muscles of patients with inflammatory myopathies but it may be also toxic to the myotubes in vitro. Available anti-TNF-a agents include: (i) Etanercept (Embrel), a TNF-a receptor fusion protein approved for rheumatoid arthritis, which has been tried in uncontrolled series in some patients with PM, DM, and IBM with limited results; (ii) Remicade (Infiximab), a chimeric anti-TNF-a monoclonal antibody, also approved for rheumatoid arthritis and Crohn's disease. Remicade has been tried anecdotally in PM, DM, and IBM patients, but a controlled study has not been conducted. Preliminary studies suggest that it can be of help to some patients with inflammatory myopathies [76,77]; and (iii) Atalimumab (Humira), a humanized anti-TNF-a agent, also approved for rheumatoid arthritis [78]. There are no reports on the effectiveness of Humira in DM, PM, or IBM. (c) b-interferons. The immunomodulating effects of b-interferons in multiple sclerosis may be also applicable in the treatment of inflammatory myopathies. A pilot study with Avonex was ineffective in IBM, but a controlled multicenter trial with higher doses is being considered [79]. Anti-IL 1 receptor antagonist (Anakinra). Approved for rheumatoid arthritis [78]. This drug has not been tried in PM, DM, or IBM.

Cellular adhesion to the vessel wall and egression of inflammatory cells from the blood stream to the target tissues (a) IVIg. IVIg affects transmigration of T cells by

interfering with VLA4/ICAM on the endothelial cell wall and downregulating VCAM, metalloproteinases and chemokines [80]. (b) Natalizumab. Against the a4b1 integrin (VLA4) on leucocytes. This is the fundamental molecule for adhesion and transmigration of T cells. Natalizumab has shown impressive results in patients with multiple sclerosis and Crohn's disease [81]. The drug is currently on hold because three cases of PML developed among more than 1500 patients who received it. A decision regarding its re-marketing is expected soon. If re-approved, this will be a very reasonable drug to try in difficult PM, DM, IBM cases.

Conventional immunosuppressive therapies in inflammatory myopathies

These therapies are not selectively targeting the relevant, pathogenic, autoreactive T cells in PM and IBM or the complement-mediated process on the endomysial capillaries in DM. Instead, they induce a non-selective immunosuppression or immunomodulation. Although these drugs form the back bone of immunotherapy in PM and DM, their benefit is based on empirical and mostly uncontrolled observations [1][2][3][4][5][6][82][83][84][85].

A. Corticosteroids: the drug of choice for the initial treatment for PM and DM

Prednisone is the first in line drug based on experience but not on controlled trials [82][83][84][85]. Since the effectiveness and relative safety of prednisone therapy will determine the future need for stronger immunosuppressive drugs, it is preferable to start with a high-dose early in the disease. At least 1 mg/kg or 60-80 mg/day prednisone, as a single daily morning dose (after breakfast), for an initial period of 3-4 weeks is recommended. Another option, especially in patients with severe PM or DM and systemic manifestations, is to start treatment with IV methylprednisolone 1 gm/day for 3-5 days and continue with the oral prednisone regimen, as mentioned above [86,87]. After a month of high-dose, oral, daily prednisone, a slow tapering over a 10-week period, to reach a 60-80 mg single daily, alternate-day, dose is recommended. This is accomplished by gradually reducing the alternate, 'off-day' dose by 10 mg per week, or faster if necessitated by side effects, though this carries a greater risk of breakthrough of disease. If there is evidence of efficacy and there are no serious adverse effects, the dosage is reduced gradually by 5-10 mg every 3-4 weeks until the lowest possible dose that controls the diseases is reached. In a patient responding to prednisone, a 'maintenance' dose of 10-25 mg every other day may be needed to secure stability. On the other hand, if by the time the dosage has been reduced to 60-80 mg every other day (approximately 14 weeks after initiating therapy), there is no objective benefit (defined as increased muscle strength and not as lowering of the CK or a subjective feeling of increased energy), the patient may be considered unresponsive to prednisone, and tapering is accelerated while the next immunosuppressive drug in the line of preference is started.

To minimize side effects, every patient is requested from the beginning of steroid therapy to start a strict lowcarbohydrate, low-salt, high-protein diet. Antacids may be added, preferably a calcium-containing one such as Tums, between meals. Tagament, Zantac, Prilosec, or the other similar drugs, are alternatives. Co-administration of calcium supplement (1 gm/day) and vitamin D (50,000 units per week) may be useful. In postmenopausal women, when long-term therapy is required, I prefer Alendronade (Fosamax) once weekly, because of its proven efficacy in the prophylaxis of steroid-related osteoporosis. Patients at high risk of exposure to tuberculosis, especially in certain geographical regions where tuberculosis is prevalent, and those with a recently documented positive PPD test may be given isoniazid (INH) prophylaxis.

Steroid myopathy versus disease activity

The long-term use of prednisone may theoretically cause worsening of muscle strength associated with a normal or unchanged CK level, referred to as 'steroid myopathy.' The term steroid myopathy is a misnomer because steroids do not cause histological signs of a destructive myopathy but, rather, selective atrophy of type II muscle fibers. Contrary to what is believed, the condition is not common. Rarely, it may be difficult to distinguish a developing steroid-induced myopathic weakness from the increased weakness related to disease activity or to other factors such as decreased mobility, infections, or a concomitant systemic illness. The decision to adjust the prednisone dosage in a patient with myositis who has previously responded to treatment may be influenced by reviewing the past 1-2 months history of strength, mobility, serum CK, medication changes, and associated medical conditions. For example, in a patient who for the past 1-2 months has had increased CK levels, no new overt signs of steroid toxicity with reduced or unchanged dosage of steroids, and no evidence of a systemic illness or infection, increasing muscle weakness is most likely due to worsening of the disease that may require more prednisone or has become steroid-resistant. On the other hand, in a patient with increasing weakness and stable CK who receives high dose of steroids, the weakness may be due to a combination of disease activity and steroid-myopathy. When the signs are not clear, one may arbitrarily raise the prednisone dosage and wait for the answer, which can be evident in about 2-8 weeks, according to the change in the patient's strength. A clinical sign I have found to be of some help is the strength of neck extensor muscles, which usually worsens with exacerbation of the disease but remains unchanged with steroid-induced muscle intoxication. Electromyography, seeking for increased spontaneous activity could be another sign suggestive of active disease.

Treatment of relapses while on maintenance steroid therapy

Relapses may occur while the steroid dose is decreased below a critical level for a given patient, or in patients who are seemingly stable but decompensate after a viral illness, concurrent infections or for unknown factors [82][83][84][85]. Most such patients can be controlled if the dose of prednisone is increased to a high single daily dose (as high as the initial), or to a high alternate day (if the relapse is mild), for a period of 1 month followed by a slow taper. Often times, however, severe relapses require more aggressive strategies, such as IVIg and addition of an immunosuppressant, as described below.

Steroid-resistant cases and steroid-sparing regimens: second line therapy using immunosuppressants or IVIg

Although the majority of the patients with bona fide PM and DM respond to steroids to some degree and for some period of time, a number of them fail to respond or become steroid resistant. The decision to start an immunosuppressive drug or IVIg in these patients is based on the following factors: (a) its 'steroid-sparing' effect when, in spite of steroid responsiveness, the patient has developed significant complications; (b) attempts to lower a high steroid dosage have repeatedly resulted in worsening of muscle strength; (c) adequate doses of prednisone for at least a 2-3 month period have been ineffective; and (d) the disease is rapidly progressive with evolving severe weakness and respiratory failure. The preference for selecting an immunosuppressive drug or IVIg is empirical because controlled comparable studies have not been conducted. The choice is usually based on our own prejudices or personal experience with each drug, and our own assessment of the relative efficacy/safety ratio, disease severity, clinical setting and other associated conditions. I consider a two tier level for these drugs. 5.3.1. First tier 5.3.1.1. High-dose intravenous immunoglobulin. As already stated, IVIg has multiple mechanisms of actions, on cytokines, competition with autoantibodies, inhibition of complement deposition, interference with Fc receptor binding on macrophages or the immunoglobulins on B cells, blocking the Fc receptors on target antigens, and interference with antigen recognition by sensitized T cells [70][71][72]. More than one of these actions are probably responsible for the observed benefit.

IVIg is the only drug whose efficacy in inflammatory myopathies has been tested on controlled trials. In a double blind study of IVIg therapy at 2 gm/kg given in two days in patients with refractory dermatomyositis, a significantly improved strength was noted in the IVIg-randomized patients [12]. The improvement becomes noticeable about 15 days after the first IVIg infusion, and it is clear and definitive after the second infusion. Marked improvement is also noticed in the active violaceous rash or the chronic scaly eruptions on the knuckles. Repeated infusions may be required every 6-12 weeks to maintain improvement [12,82,88]. In several patients we have been able to lower the prednisone and keep only a low maintenance dose. Some patients with DM who had become unresponsive to steroids, may respond again to prednisone after a few IVIg infusions. Repeat open muscle biopsies on patients who clinically improved have showed marked improvement in the muscle cytoarchitecture, increased number of capillaries per fiber, reduction of inflammation, inhibition of complement deposits (MAC) on the endomysial capillaries and downregulation of the intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM-I), the major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC-I) antigen and the expression of TGF-b 1 [12,70,71].

Since DM responds to steroids, IVIg therapy is best reserved for steroid-resistant patients as a second line therapy. The dramatic results observed with IVIg, however, have prompted some clinicians to use it as first line therapy supplemented by a low-dose steroids.

The beneficial effect of IVIg in PM has been documented repeatedly in open-label trials [88,[89][90][91]. A controlled study that we had started 10 years ago in patients with PM was never completed because most patients referred for the study as 'steroid-resistant' PM, had IBM or another disease confirming that PM is not common. It is the experience of ours and others however, that IVIg is effective in more than half of the patients with PM [88,[89][90][91].

In IBM patients, controlled studies have shown no statistically significant differences in the strength of the limb muscles between placebo and IVIg [92]. Significant differences however, were noted regionally in certain muscle groups, especially in the muscles of the lower limbs and those of swallowing. Another study conducted for 6 months showed similar results and an apparent stability [93]. The dysphagia, which had objectively improved with IVIg based on our original double-blind study, appears to improve consistently on subsequent open-label trials and it is a reason to consider the use of IVIg in some IBM patients [94]. Whether IVIg could have some impact on the natural history of the disease, if given for a longer period or when combined with another agent targeting a specific component of the immune network, remains unclear.

Azathioprine. Although lower doses (1.5-2 mg/kg) are commonly used, higher doses up to 3 mg/kg are needed for effective immunosuppression. Because azathioprine is usually effective after 6 months of treatment, patience is required before it is concluded that the drug is ineffective. The major toxicity of azathioprine includes thrombocytopenia, anemia, leukopenia, pancytopenia, drug fever, nausea, and liver toxicity. An elevation in the levels of liver enzymes, if slight, needs only observation. Azathioprine which is metabolized by xanthine oxidase, if given concurrently with allopurinol, can be severely toxic to the liver or bone marrow and combined use of these two drugs is not recommended. As with all immunosuppressants, we discontinue their use in women pursuing pregnancy. The toxicity of these drugs in men trying to start a family remains unclear but, as a general rule, we advocate a 6 month discontinuation before impregnation.

Methotrexate. An antagonist of folate metabolism, methotrexate is a useful drug. I prefer the oral route starting at 7.5 mg weekly for the first three weeks (given in a total of 3 doses, 2.5 mg every 12 h), increasing it gradually by 2.5 mg per week up to a total of 25 mg weekly. Folic acid supplements are recommended. A relevant side effect is methotrexate pneumonitis, which can be difficult to distinguish from the interstitial lung disease seen in some patients with inflammatory myopathies. Other adverse effects include stomatitis, gastrointestinal symptoms, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, renal toxicity, hepatotoxicity, and malignancies. Because it acts faster than Azathioprine, I have now started to use it early in the therapeutic plan as a steroid-sparing agent. 5.3.1.2. Mycophenolate mofetil. This is a morpholinoethylester of mycophenolic acid that blocks de novo purine synthesis and acts on both B and T cells. It is an antipurine antimetabolite, like azathioprine, but it does not cause significant bone marrow suppression or hepatoxicity. It is now emerging as a promising and well-tolerated drug when used at doses up to 2 GM per day. There is anecdotal evidence that mycophenolate may be of benefit not only to patients with PM and DM but also to some IBM patients. It may take at about three months to observe any clinical benefit.

IVIg or immunosuppressants as a second line therapy?

The excellent effect of IVIg in many DM and PM patients and the limited beneficial effect achieved by the other immunosuppressants, have changed the order by which these agents are used. In our practice, if steroids are inadequate, our preference is to go directly to IVIg and then add one of the aforementioned immunosuppressants, as needed. 5.3.2. Second tier 5.3.2.1. Cyclosporine. It affects T-cell mediated immunity by inhibiting transcription of certain genes, mostly the IL-2 gene, resulting in reduced IL-2 and other cytokines. At doses of 150 mg twice a day (not more than 5 mg/kg/day) and monitoring of the optimal trough serum level (100-200 mg/ml), this drug can be given without major complications. The kidney function should be closely monitored and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (i.e. Motrin) are avoided. The concomitant use of Ketoconazol (which inhibits the P450 cytochromal enzyme in the liver) allows for a lower (up to 80%) dose with less toxicity. Cyclosporine acts faster than the other drugs but its efficacy in PM, DM, IBM has not been established with controlled studies. 5.3.2.2. Cyclophosphamide. In patients who have interstitial lung disease and severe clinical myopathy, this drug may be considered at doses of 0.7-1 mg/m 2 , monthly, intravenously. Adequate hydration the day before and antiemetics are helpful. Adverse reactions include nausea, vomiting, alopecia, hemorrhagic cystitis, pulmonary fibrosis, bone marrow suppression, secondary malignancies, and sterility. It is critical to monitor the neutrophil count (no less than 1500-2000) and the lymphocyte count (no less than 1000) at 7,10,14,21 days and perform frequent urinalysis even after the drug was stopped.

Newer agents

(a) Rituximab. This is a monoclonal antibody against CD20CB cells resulting in B cell depletion that lasts for at least six months. There is evidence based on a small series of seven patients that Rituximab at 375 mg/mg 2 once a week for four weeks can be beneficial to patients with DM resistant to therapies [73]. (b) Tacrolimus. Formerly known as FK 506, Tacrolimus is structurally different from cyclosporine although both share the ability to selectively inhibit the transcription of cytokines and specifically IL-2, as described earlier.

There is anecdotal evidence that Tacrolimus is effective in some difficult cases of polymyositis [62][63][64]. (c) Sirolimus. Formerly known as Rapamycin, this drug inhibits the proliferation of both T and B cells and the production of cytokines, especially IL-2. In contrast to Cyclosporine and Tacrolimus that inhibit transcription of IL2, Sirolimus prevents the translation of mRNA for key cytokines, and has an effect on T cells even after their activation. Its use in PM and DM is limited, but in experienced hands this drug may be an option for difficult cases. Anecdotal reports show promise [65].

6. A step by step approach to therapy of DM and PM

Polymyositis and dermatomyositis

Step 1. Prednisone (in aggressive cases, combination with another agent listed in steps 2,3 is preferred by some practitioners) Step 2. IVIg (the use of IVIg as a second line therapy is justified based on the observation that the immunosuppressants listed in step 3 have a mild and mostly a steroid-sparing effect) Step 3. Immunosuppressants, such as Azathioprine, Methotrexate, Mycophenolate or Cyclosporine Step 4. Newer agents (Rituximab, Tacrolimus, Rapamycin)

Treatment of inclusion body myositis

In spite of immunopathological features identical to PM, IBM patients are difficult to treat. Although a number of patients may transiently respond to steroids, the majority do not. Methotrexate in a controlled study, was not better than placebo. Cyclosporin, Azathioprine or Total lymphoid irradiation are ineffective. IVIg may provide some benefit to a small number of patients for a period of time, especially in dysphagia, as demonstrated with a controlled study [92] and documented on subsequent open-label trials [94]. Since dysphagia is life threatening, IVIg should be considered in patients with significant swallowing difficulties and choking episodes. Collectively, my personal approach in the management of patients with IBM is sequentially as follows: (a) Inform the patient that there is no proven effective therapy. In such patients, I prescribe Co-enzyme Q 10 and Vitamin E even though there is no demonstrable benefit. I also advocate a systematic non-fatiguing exercise program which has been shown to be of benefit [95]; (b) Administer low-dose, every other day, prednisone combined with mycophenolate in some patients hoping for disease stability with a clear explanation that the benefit from this regimen is anecdotal and not based on controlled studies; and (c) a trial with IVIg if there is significant worsening of muscle strength or life-threatening dysphagia.

Goals of therapy and clinical assessment

The goal of therapy in inflammatory myopathies is to improve muscle strength and activities of daily living. Although when the strength improves the serum CK falls concurrently, the reverse is not always true because most of the immunosuppressive therapies can result in a decrease of serum muscle enzymes without necessarily improving muscle strength. Unfortunately, this has been misinterpreted as 'chemical improvement', and has formed the basis for the common habit of 'chasing' or 'treating' the CK level instead of the muscle weakness, a practice that has led to a prolonged use of unnecessary immunosuppressive drugs and erroneous assessment of their efficacy. It is prudent to discontinue these drugs if an adequate trial has led only to a reduction in CK and not to an objective improvement in muscle strength. The level of CK is only helpful as an auxiliary measure and not as a guide to start or monitor therapy.

On assessing strength, it is also useful to keep in mind that some patients under-report changes in their strength, others overinterpret a feeling of well-being as 'improvement', and still others over-report or elaborate extensively on their symptoms. For these reasons, it is very informative to ask the patients specific questions about changes in performing routine physical tasks at home or work and activities of daily living.

In a patient who responds to steroid therapy, the ultimate goal is to find the lowest dose that controls the disease with the least adverse effects. When this goal is reached, it is quite appropriate to consider adding a steroid-sparing drug, while lowering the amount of steroid, without a breakthrough of disease. I do not advocate a concurrent use of steroids with another immunosuppressant from the outset of treatment, except if the disease has a very aggressive course and the patient is rapidly worsening. 9. Prognosis: good, but we need better DM responds more favorably to therapy than PM. Overall, most patients improve, and many of them make a full functional recovery, which is sustained with maintenance therapy. However, up to 30% of the patients may be left with residual muscle weakness [3]. The five-year survival rate for treated patients with PM and DM is now approaching 80%. On the other hand, IBM is predictably disabling. Most of these patients will require use of an assistive device such as a cane, walker, or wheelchair. The older the age of onset, the more rapidly progressive the course of IBM appears to be.

Practical therapeutic considerations

In the light of the information presented earlier regarding the efficacy of these therapies, the following observations and practical tips may be useful [82,91] 

Future directions

Advances in biotechnology have promoted the development of a new class of biotechnological products for immunotherapy. These biotechnological agents are used to manipulate the immune system by selectively mimicking, inhibiting, or otherwise interacting with naturally occurring polypeptides or oligonucleotides [56]. Some of the new biotechnological agents hold the promise of an unprecedented selectivity of action. However, these agents also present a number of specific problems, including inconvenient application (by s.c., i.m., or i.v. injection), high cost, and immunogenicity (stimulation of neutralizing antibodies).

Ideally, immunotherapy would be applied only for a limited, short time to achieve a permanent result. Such tolerance-inducing therapy has indeed been achieved in experimental situations, especially in transplantation. These experiments demonstrate that it is possible to achieve a state of permanent and selective immune tolerance by combining different immunological manipulations. By analogy, it may be possible to 'silence' an ongoing immune reaction permanently by combining different immunotherapies, such as using anti-leukocyte differentiation antigens in combination with anti-costimulatory agents [56].

For the future, it is to be hoped that new techniques will continue to advance our understanding of the immunopathogenesis of PM, DM, IBM, and that these advances in knowledge can be rapidly translated into therapeutic applications. These agents should be cautiously selected considering their cost and safety profile. If promising in small pilot trials, they should be always tested in controlled studies. For IBM, strategies to inhibit myofiber cell-stress response by targeting the molecules implicated in MHCactivation and protein misfolding may be rewarding.

Acknowledgements

This research was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the NIH, NINDS.

1 and 2. For dermatomyositis these targets include: (a) complement activation and interception of MAC formation; (b) cytokines and chemokines; (c) molecules associated with T-cell transmigration and; (d) B cells (Fig. 1). For Polymyositis and IBM the targets are: (a) factors leading to MHC-I upregulation, i.e. cytokines; (b) activated, cytotoxic T cells; (c) factors associated with T-cell activation and proliferation; (d) costimulatory molecules; (e) cytokines and chemokines; and (f) molecules associated with Tcell transmigration (Fig.

(a) IVIg [70-72] (b) Rituximab [73] 3. Complement (a) IVIg [70-72,74] (b) Anti C 5 monoclonal antibody(Eculizumab) [75] 4. Fc receptors on macrophages (a) IVIg [70-72] 5. Cytokines/chemokines/adhesion molecules (a) IVIg [70-72] (b) Anti-TNF-a agents: (i) Etanercept; (ii) Remicade; (iii) Atalimumab [76-78] (c) Anti-IL 1 receptor antagonist (Anakinra) [78] (d) b-interferons [79] 6. T cell transmigration (a) IVIg [70-72] (b) Natalizumab (Tysabri) [81]

Fig. 3 .3Fig.3. Signalling pathways activated by T-cell receptor (TCR) engagement. TCR interaction with antigen/MHC activates intracellular phosphotyrosine kinases (ZAP-70) that mediate signaling via phosphorylation of immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs) and transduction molecules such as CD52. Antibodies against CD52 (CAMPATH [#1]) can stop the T cell activation. T-cell activation is increased via costimulatory factors delivered by LFA-I/ICAM and LFA-3/CD2 interaction. Antibodies against LFA1, such as Efalizumab (Raptiva) [#2], or against LFA3 such as Alefacept [#3], can block the activation process. TCR engagement and co-stimulation, in turn, activate downstream events that, via phospholipase PLC and activation of the phosphatase calcineurin, activate the nuclear factor of activated T cells; this is translocated into the nucleus where it binds to IL2 promoter to induce specific gene transcription leading to cell proliferation and differentiation. The agent that blocks cyclophilin is cyclosporin [#5] and the one that blocks the FK binding protein is Tacrolimus [#6], both of which suppress T cell activation and exert an immunosuppressive effect. Activated T cells downstream, synthesize the T-cell growth factor interleukin 2 and its receptor, composed of a b chain and a g chain that binds to interleukin 2 with moderate affinity. This receptor can be blocked by the monoclonal antibody to CD25, Daclizumab [#4]. Binding of interleukin 2 to the receptor in turn, activates intracellular signaling cascade via janus kinases (JAK1, JAK3) and subsequent phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) proteins. Signalling associated with interleukin 2 receptor is sensitive to the action of sirolimus (Rapamycin) [#7], which mediates its action via FK-506 binding protein (FKBP). Further down, T cell proliferation depends on de novo purine synthesis. Two drugs, Mycophenolate Mofetil and Azathioprine [#8], inhibit the purine pathways and induce immunosuppression. LFA-1, lymphocyte function antigen 1; LFA-3, lymphocyte function antigen 3; ITAM, immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs; ICAM, intercellular adhesion molecule; ZAP-70, zeta-chain associated protein 70; PTK, protein tyrosine kinase; NFAT, nuclear factor of activated T cells; CTLA-4, cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen; PLC, phospholipase C. TOR, target of rapamycin protein; STAT, signal transducer and activator of transcription.

Table 11Therapeutic targets in PM, DM, IBM and the available biological agentsdirected against them1. Intracellular signaling pathways(a) anti-CD52 (Alemtuzumab) [58](b) anti-LFA 1 /ICAM (Efalizumab) [60](c) anti-LFA 3 /CD2(Alefacept) [59](d) anti-IL 2 R antagonist (CD25) (Daclizumab) [61](e) Calcineurin inhibitors (Tacrolimus and Cyclosporin) [54,57,62-65](f) Against TOR kinase via FK-506 binding protein (Rapamycin)[54-57,66](g) Inhibition of purine biosynthesis by T and B cells (MycophenolateMofetil) [54-56,67,68](h) Anti-thymocyte globulin [69]2. B cells and autoantibodies

:(a) Most patients with bona fide PM and DM respond to prednisone to a certain degree and for some period of time. (b) A patient with presumed PM, who has not responded to any form of immunotherapy, most likely has IBM or another disease. In these cases, a repeat muscle biopsy and a more vigorous search for the 'other disease' are recommended. (c) Calcinosis, a manifestation of DM, does not resolve with immunotherapies. New calcium deposits, however, may be prevented if the primary disease responds to the available therapies. Diphosphonates, aluminum hydroxide, probenecid, colchicines, low doses of warfarin, and surgical excision have all been tried without success. (d) If prednisone or the other immunosuppressive therapies have not helped or have become ineffective in improving the patients' strength, they should be discontinued to avoid severe, irreversible adverse effects because, contrary to common belief, there is no evidence that their continuation maintains stability or prevents further disease progression. (e) Patients with interstitial lung disease may have a high mortality rate, and require aggressive treatment with Cyclophosphamide, Cyclosporin, or Tacrolimus. (f) In patients with cancer-associated myositis, the treatment of cancer is a priority. If the symptoms of myositis continue, treatment should be initiated as in the patients without cancer. (g) Physical therapy to preserve existing muscle function, avoid disuse atrophy of the weak muscles, and prevent joint contractures should start early in the disease. (h) When treatment of PM is unsuccessful, the patient should be reevaluated and the muscle biopsy reexamined. A new biopsy might be considered to make sure that the diagnosis is correct and that the diagnosis of IBM has not been overlooked. It should be kept in mind that PM is not a common disease. The disorders most commonly mistaken for PM are: IBM, sporadic limb-girdle dystrophy with endomysial inflammation resembling polymyositis, metabolic myopathy (such as phosphorylase deficiency), endocrinopathy, druginduced myopathies with some secondary inflammatory features, and neurogenic muscular atrophies. (i) The major pitfalls leading to failure of steroid or immunosuppressive treatment include: (1) inadequate initial dose of prednisone or cytotoxic drugs; (2) short duration of therapy or quick tapering; (3) early discontinuation of prednisone without keeping a 'maintenance' low-dose therapy; (4) early development of preventable side effects necessitating early discontinuation of prednisone; and (5) wrong diagnosis.

