Update on idiopathic inflammatory myopathies

The inflammatory myopathies are a group of acquired diseases, characterized by an inflammatory infiltrate of the skeletal muscle. On the basis of clinical, immuno-pathological and demographic features, three major diseases can be identified: dermatomyositis (DM); polymyositis (PM); and inclusion body myositis (IBM). New diagnostic criteria have recently been introduced, which are crucial for discriminating between the three different subsets of inflammatory myopathies and for excluding other disorders. DM is a complement-mediated microangiopathy affecting skin and muscle. PM and IBM are T cell-mediated disorders, where CD8-positive cytotoxic T cells invade muscle fibres expressing MHC class I antigens, thus leading to fibre necrosis. In IBM, vacuolar formation with amyloid deposits are also present. This article summarizes the main clinical, laboratory, electrophysiological, immunological and histologic features as well as the therapeutic options of the inflammatory myopathies.

Introduction

The inflammatory myopathies are a group of acquired diseases characterized by an inflammatory infiltrate of the skeletal muscle. Polymyositis (PM), dermatomyositis (DM) and inclusion body myositis (IBM) are the three major categories of idiopathic inflammatory myopathies. Although they might share some similarities, they have distinct clinical, histopathological, immunological and pathogenetic features. PM and IBM are T cell-mediated diseases whereas DM is characterized by a complement-mediated microangiopathy. It is crucial to distinguish the three disorders since they differ in prognosis and response to treatment.

Classification

In 1975, Bohan and Peter [1,2] classified myositis in five groups (idiopathic PM, idiopathic DM, PM -DM associated with cancer, juvenile PM -DM and PM -DM associated with other connective tissue diseases or overlap syndromes). However, these criteria had never been validated and recently revised [3] with also the introduction of IBM [4]. The new criteria include immunopathologic findings and emphasize the role of the MHC/CD8 complex as a specific marker which allows to differentiate the antigen-driven inflammatory cells characteristic of PM and IBM from the nonspecific, secondary inflammatory response present in other muscular diseases, such as dystrophies. The analysis of gene expression by microarray may help in the diagnosis since the three inflammatory myopathies have a distinct gene expression pattern [5].

Epidemiology

PM and DM are rare diseases and only a few epidemiological studies have been published. The reported incidence ranges between two and eight new cases per million of inhabitants per year [6 -9]. Data about prevalence are even poorer and mostly based on old epidemiological studies, which may be misleading, since based on old and never validated diagnostic criteria. In general, DM seems the most common and PM the least common, whereas IBM is the more frequent inflammatory myopathy over the age of 50. DM affects both children and adults, whereas PM generally occurs after the second decade of life.

As to gender, when considering the DM -PM as a whole, the female/male ratio is about 2:1. However, inside each subgroup of PM -DM, there are sexrelated differences: the female/male ratio is 1:2 in cancer associated PM -DM; 1:1 in juvenile PM -DM; and 9:1 in the forms associated with other connective tissue diseases.

A recent study on a large population of North American Caucasian patients demonstrated that HLA susceptibility markers differ in diverse myositis phenotypes, pointing to different pathogenetic mechanisms [10].

Etiopathogenesis

DM is a microangiopathy affecting skin and muscle, where early activation and deposition of complement causes lysis of endomysial capillaries and muscle ischaemia [11]. In PM and IBM, clonally expanded CD8-positive cytotoxic T cells invade muscle fibers that express MHC class I antigens, leading to fiber necrosis via the perforin pathway. In IBM, vacuolar formation with amyloid deposits coexists with the immunological features suggesting two concurrent pathogenic processes, a immunological cytotoxic T cells-mediated mechanism and a degenerative one. The causative autoantigen has not yet been identified. Recently, using a microarray technique, the immunoregulatory genes activated in the muscles of patients with DM and IBM and their changes after immunomodulatory therapy with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) have been investigated [12]. Several genes associated with immunoregulatory pathways, adhesion molecules and the cytoskeletal network resulted to be upregulated in DM and IBM muscles. After IVIg, gene expression pattern in DM patients who responded to therapy was different from IBM unresponsive patients. The contribution of T lymphocytes, dendritic cells and cytokines in inflammatory myopathies is extensively analyzed in two review articles of the present Autoimmunity issue [13,14].

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of inflammatory myopathies is suspected on the basis of clinical features and confirmed by laboratory tests, serum muscle enzyme concentration, presence of autoantibodies, electromyography (EMG) and muscle biopsy. Moreover, muscle magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and ultrasound (US) have been recently introduced in the diagnostic work up of patients with inflammatory myopathies.

Clinical features

PM is generally dominated by muscular manifestations, whereas in DM cutaneous signs accompany or precede muscular involvement. Together with the muscular manifestations, cutaneous, joint, gastrointestinal, pulmonary, heart and renal manifestations may be present.

The main symptoms are weakness, affecting mainly the proximal muscles and myalgias. The onset is typically subacute (over several weeks), but in DM may be acute (days) or insidious (several months), with patients complaining of increasing fatigue in rising from a chair, lifting their arms, climbing steps, combing their hair or hanging clothes. Distal muscles are involved late in DM and PM, but quite early in IBM (especially wrist and finger flexors) with impairment of fine motor tasks, such as holding and manipulating objects. The neck extensor muscles may be involved, causing difficulty in holding up the head (head drop). In severe, advanced cases, the respiratory and oropharyngeal muscles are involved causing dysphagia and respiratory difficulties. Myalgias are less frequent than muscular weakness, and when present, accompany the weakness.

The most common clinical signs are reduction of the muscular strength in the proximal muscles, contractures and late in the course of the disease, muscular atrophy (40% of cases). In IBM, muscle weakness and wasting are most profound in knee extensors, hip flexors and long finger flexors. The reduction of the strength represents one of the most sensitive parameters for monitoring the disease activity and needs to be scored in order to standardize the measurement. The strength is generally measured with the Medical Research Council (MRC) scale (in which zero is the lowest score and five the highest) [15]. Besides the MRC scale, response to therapy can be assessed with the neuromuscular-symptom scale [16] and functional scales. For childhood and juvenile DM -PM, a childhood myositis assessment scale (CMAS) has been proposed [17].

Skin manifestations are very helpful for the diagnosis of DM. They often precede (and sometimes accompany) of several months or years the signs of muscle involvement [1,18]. They can also be observed without myositis (amyopathic DM).

The most common skin manifestation is a photosensitive rash on the face, neck, anterior chest and the extensor surface of the arms which can be observed in 40% of patients. It is an erythematous rash with a violaceous hue, sometimes with very fine scaling and, when localized to the face, may mimic the malar rash observed in systemic lupus erhytematosous (SLE). The involvement of the scalp is characterized by a more abundant scaling, resembling seborrheic dermatitis. A very peculiar sign of DM is the heliotrope rash, a purplish erythema of the eyelids, often associated with periorbital edema. It is considered a cutaneous manifestation characteristic of DM, being absent in other connective tissue diseases. However, the specificity is not absolute, since the rash has been reported, although rarely, in allergic syndromes, trichinosis and in one case of sarcoidosis with muscular involvement [19]. The heliotrope rash can be observed in up to 25% of DM cases and can precede of months or years the appearance of muscular signs.

In 30% of the cases, violaceous erythematous lesions (Gottron's sign) or papules (Gottron's papules) may be observed on the extensor surface of metacarpophalangeal, proximal and distal interphalangeal joints. Moreover, violaceous erythematous lesions, sometimes with scaling, may be observed also on the elbows, knees, malleoli and other bony prominences.

Raynaud's phenomenon is reported in 35% of cases and is usually present only in patients with idiopathic DM and in PM -DM associated with connective tissue diseases.

The vasculitic skin manifestations are more frequent in the juvenile form of DM and consist of subcutaneous nodules, erythema, periungual infarctions and digital ulcers. Also, calcifications in the subcutaneous tissues are more frequent in the juvenile form, where they can determine subcutaneous painful hard nodules, which can ulcerate the overlying skin with leakage of calcareous material.

Arthralgias are frequent in the acute phase of the disease, but a real synovitis occurs rarely.

The most common gastrointestinal symptom is dysphagia, present in 1/3 of cases. It can be due to involvement of the oropharyngeal muscles and/or upper esophagus striated muscular fibers [20,21]. In the juvenile form, gastrointestinal bleedings may occur usually secondary to ulcerate vasculitic lesions, often with intestinal localization.

Pulmonary symptoms are due to weakness of the thoracic muscles or interstitial lung disease. Pulmonary fibrosis, ab ingestis pneumonia (secondary to a lack of coordination of swallowing muscles) and ventilatory insufficiency are the most common findings. Fibrosis is radiologically demonstrated in 5 -10% of cases [22] and is often associated with anti-tRNA synthetase antibodies (anti-Jo-1) or with a mucin-like glycoprotein (KL-6) [23,24]. It may be unresponsive to steroid therapy and rapidly evolve into respiratory failure.

Cardiac abnormalities are frequent in PM and DM, but they are often subclinical. Electrocardiographic abnormalities, including conduction defects and arrhythmias, have been described in 50% of the cases [25,26], but rarely require pace-maker implantation. Severe myocarditis is rare, whereas mild and subclinical forms are probably more frequent [25]. The most severe forms may occasionally lead to congestive heart failure.

Renal involvement is rare. It can be caused by a persistent myoglobinuria [27] and even more rarely by mesangial or rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis [28,29].

Laboratory abnormalities

Both non-specific and specific biohumoral abnormalities may be observed.

During the active phases of the disease, serum inflammation indexes (ESR, C reactive protein) may be increased. Anti-nuclear antibodies are detected in 50% of cases by indirect immunofluorescence and in 80% with ELISA. These findings are, however, nonspecific, being found also in other connective tissue diseases.

High serum levels of muscular enzymes and the positivity of some autoantibodies are characteristic of the disease. The most sensitive muscle enzyme is serum creatine kinase (CK) which increases in the acute phase. Elevation in serum aldolase, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), aspartate and alanine aminotransferase (AST and ALT) may also occur. However, in some cases of DM, CK serum levels are normal at disease onset: whether these patients have a worse prognosis and more common association with pulmonary fibrosis or cancer, as suggested [30], remains unclear. In the late phases of the disease, however, when muscle fibrosis prevails, serum levels of muscular enzymes may not be increased. CK MB isoenzyme may be elevated in absence of any cardiac abnormality [31] and is considered an expression of muscle fiber regeneration. Nevertheless, an increase of CK serum concentration may occur also in some non-inflammatory muscle diseases, such as muscular dystrophy and in healthy subjects after an intense physical exercise or intramuscular injections.

Myoglobin is a protein present in skeletal and cardiac muscle, but not in other tissues, whose blood concentration can raise during muscular diseases and can also be present in the urine [27]. Increased serum myoglobin can be detected in 70 -80% of patients with active myositis, while myoglobinuria is less frequent. The highest serum levels of myoglobin seem to correlate well with the active phases of the disease. In myositis, serum myoglobin levels increase earlier than CK and return to normality before all the other enzymes.

Autoantibodies

Traditionally, autoantibodies associated with inflammatory myopathies have been divided into myositis specific autoantibodies (MSA) and myositis associated autoantibodies (MAA), the latter occurring also in autoimmune diseases with no myositis. MSA are present in 30 -40% of patients with PM -DM and are directed against cytoplasmic aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, a heterogenous family of enzymes which catalyze the ATP-dependent binding between an amino acid and its cognate tRNA during protein synthesis (Table I) [32]. Antibodies directed against six of the 20 aminoacyl tRNA synthetases have been described and among them, anti-hystidil-tRNA synthetase (anti-Jo-1) antibodies seem to be the most frequent. Autoanti-bodies against other synthetases specific for alanine (anti-PL-12), treonine (anti-PL-7), glicine (anti-EJ), isoleucine (anti-OJ) and asparagine (anti-KS) are less frequent (3-5%). These antibodies are observed also in patients affected with the so called anti-tRNA synthetase antibodies syndrome, which is characterized by clinical signs of myositis, pulmonary fibrosis, joint pain or arthritis, Raynaud's phenomenon and skin lesions of the hands (mechanic's hands).

Anti-Jo-1 antibodies are found in 10% of patients and are a useful clinical marker because of their frequent association with interstitial lung disease. These antibodies may also be found in DM, although less frequently than in PM, and are rare in children with PM or DM and in other connective tissue diseases [24]. Their specificity is, however, unclear, being present also in patients with interstitial lung disease without myositis.

Other MSA are anti-Mi-2 and anti-signal recognition particle (SRP) antibodies. Anti-Mi-2 antibodies are directed against a nuclear protein of seven subunits, which is part of a protein complex involved in gene transcription (Table I). Anti-Mi-2 are present in 10 -15% of DM and PM and seem to be associated with acute onset of disease, good prognosis and good response to the therapy [33].

Anti-SRP antibodies are directed against a ribonucleoprotein of a six proteins complex bound to a RNA molecule of about 300 nucleotides (Table I) [34]. The presence of these antibodies in the serum identifies a group of patients with acute necrotizing myositis who generally do not respond well to therapy.

The MAA may be found also in other connective tissue diseases. The most important target antigens of MAA (Table II) are PM/Scl complex, with nucleolar localization, the Ku (p70/p80) nuclear antigen, the small nuclear and cytoplasmatic ribonucleoproteins (snRNP) (RoRNP) [35]. The anti-PM/Scl autoantibodies are generally found in patients affected by myositis, scleroderma or PM/scleroderma overlap syndrome [36], anti-Ku autoantibodies in overlap syndromes with myositis and other connective tissue diseases [37], anti-snRNP in overlap connective tissue diseases and myositis [38], anti-RoRNP almost exclusively in patients affected by Sjo ¨gren syndrome and SLE.

Electromyography

Needle EMG is useful in the diagnosis of neuromuscular diseases. Increased spontaneous and insertional activity with fibrillation potential, complex repetitive discharges, positive sharp waves, small polyphasic motor units potentials (MUPs) and early recruitment are common findings. The amount of spontaneous activity reflects an ongoing disease activity. Late in the course of the disease, insertional activity may be decreased secondary to fibrosis. These abnormalities, present in 70-90% of patients are, however, not specific since they can be detected also in other muscular diseases.

Muscle biopsy

The muscle biopsy is the gold standard in the diagnosis of inflammatory myopathies and is indicated before the beginning of the treatment. Generally, the biopsy is performed in the proximal muscles of the legs, choosing areas with active muscle involvement. Attention should be taken to avoid atrophic zones or Early in the inflammatory process, there is activation of the complement that leads to the formation and deposition of the C5b -C9 complement membrane attack complex (MAC) on or around the endomysial blood vessels, with consequent capillary necrosis, microinfarts, inflammation, endofascicular hypoperfusion and eventually perifascicular atrophy, which is the characteristic histological feature of DM. The histological features of PM are the variability in fiber size, scattered necrotic and regenerating fibers and endomysial inflammation with invasion of nonnecrotic muscle fibers. Inflammatory infiltrates mainly consist of CD8 þ (cytotoxic) T cells which invade MHC class I antigen expressing muscle fibers, a feature which is found also in IBM. Different from DM, there is no evidence of immune deposits (complement, MAC, immunoglobulins) in the microvasculature.

In IBM, the presence of rimmed vacuoles and/or intra-muscle-fiber amyloid inclusions, which contain both amyloid-b (Ab) and phosphorylated tau protein, may help in the diagnosis [39]. However, these findings are not found in up to 30% of initial IBM biopsies.

Muscle magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and P-31 magnetic resonance spectroscopy (P-31 MRS)

Imaging techniques have become increasingly important in the last few years in the diagnosis and management of muscle disease. MRI represents the gold standard of the imaging study of muscle diseases [40], where provides a detailed anatomic view of the extent of muscle damage [41]. MRI can help identifying the type (edema, inflammation, fat, fibrosis and calcifications), degree and localization of lesions. Its clinical utility is in patients with asymmetric muscle involvement and in directing the site of the diagnostic biopsy [42,43]. Whether MRI is also helpful in monitoring response to therapy is unclear because the involvement is patchy and the procedure is expensive. It can be useful, however, as a research tool if prospectively standardized.

In DM, T1-weighted images are generally without alterations, indicating the absence of fat infiltration and muscular atrophy. Inflammatory changes are highlighted in T2-weighted images and short tau inversion recovery (STIR) [42,43]. These are generally symmetric alterations with edematous aspects, particularly in the musculature close to the limbs, which correlate very well with the disease activity. The anterior muscles of the thigh are more frequently involved [41].

In PM, T1-weighted images show an alteration of the muscle anatomy with muscular atrophy and substitution of muscle with adipose [43,44]. T2-weighted images show areas of muscular inflammation. For a more detailed study of muscular inflammation, STIR imaging with fat-suppression is recommended. This technique allows to individuate the presence of inflammation also in muscle areas already replaced by adipose tissue. Both the anterior and posterior muscles of the thigh, in particular the adductors, may be involved [41].

In IBM, adipose replacement and hypo/atrophy of the muscular tissue prevail, which can be demonstrated with T1-weighted imaging, while edematous/ inflammatory changes in T2-weighted imaging have only occasionally been described [45]. P-31 MRS shows very low levels of PCr and ATP, which are indeed trapped in the adipose tissue which acts as a storehouse [46].

Muscular ultrasound

Muscular US, although still not widely used, is a promising non-invasive methodology which allows a morphological study of the muscle able to evaluate the extent and location of inflammation. US has the advantages of being accessible at bedside, easy to use, not expensive and therefore ideal for monitoring the disease course and response to therapy in individual patients. US seems to have a sensitivity equal to that of EMG and CK dosage in the diagnosis of myositis, as documented by histological studies (82.9 vs. 92.4% e 68.7%, respectively) [47].

The inflammatory myopathies differ in the US findings, with hyperechogenic changes (sometimes associated with muscular hypotrophy/atrophy) more common in the chronic forms and hypoechogenic alterations present in the acute form. In PM, in fact, hyperechogenicity of the signal and/or signs of muscular atrophy are present, especially in vastus lateralis and intermedius, triceps and brachioradial. In DM, muscular atrophy and hyperechogenicity are less common than in PM, whereas in IBM, the hypo/atrophic aspects prevail. The hyperechogenicity is due to the higher percentage of fatty tissue and to a lesser extent to fibrotic tissue present at muscular level. In the presence of acute inflammatory myopathy, the most frequent US alteration is hypoechogenicity of the muscle due to the presence of tissue edema. The muscle size may be slightly increased. In summary, in PM and in IBM, the degenerative-atrophic aspects, typical of the chronic forms, prevail with US hyperechogenicity of the signal and hypo/atrophy of the muscle fibre, while in DM, the inflammatory aspects prevail, with hypoechogenicity of the US signal typical of the acute forms [47].

US can allow the study of tissue vascularization through the use of eco-Doppler. Recently, contrast material-enhanced US has been shown to detect inflammation-induced changes in muscle perfusion of patients with myositis [48].

The disadvantages of US are the fact that is an operator dependent technique and not capable of identifying alterations in deep muscle areas.

Other forms of inflammatory myopathies

Juvenile DM It represents 7-22% of patients with DM, with a similar incidence in boys and girls. The age of onset is between 5 and 16 years. In the juvenile form, DM is more frequent than PM (2:1). The features are similar to the adult DM, even if vasculitic manifestations may be prominent. Skin calcinosis is also more frequent. Core sets of outcome variables for juvenile DM have been proposed [49,50]. PM is very rare in patients below the age of 18.

Cancer associated inflammatory myopathies

Patients with inflammatory myopathies have a higher risk of malignancy than the normal population. The risk of cancer in patients with PM-DM is estimated around 20-25% [51], with a higher incidence in patients with DM [52]. A study on a large cohort of patients revealed the presence of cancer in 32% of patients with DM and 15% with PM [53], with a higher occurrence in men and in old age [53,54]. Ovarian, lung, breast, gastrointestinal cancers and non-Hodgkin lymphoma are the most common. In the majority of cases, DM precedes of one or two years the recognition of the cancer, although sometimes it may follow or occur at the same time. In DM, the risk of cancer is higher in the first year after the diagnosis and decreases in the following years without reaching, however, the levels of normal population. On the contrary, the risk of cancer in PM, although lower than in DM, does not decrease with time. All aged patients with DM should be screened for an underlying cancer and undergo careful monitoring in the follow up [55].

Overlap syndromes

In 15 -30% of patients PM and DM may be associated with various autoimmune or connective tissue disease. PM is more frequent and the ratio F/M is particularly high [56].

Diagnostic criteria and differential diagnosis

Several diagnostic criteria for inflammatory myopathies have been proposed, most of them however have never been properly validated or tested for their specificity. The widely used criteria of Bohan and Peter [1,2] cannot distinguish PM from IBM or some forms of dystrophies. Since the advance in muscle immunopathology let now discriminate among the different inflammatory myopathies, Dalakas and Hohlfeld recently proposed muscle-biopsy-based diagnostic criteria [3].

An early diagnosis is crucial for a prompt initiation of treatment, which is essential since both DM and PM are responsive to immunotherapy.

Several neuromuscular diseases may mimic PM -DM and should be considered in the differential diagnosis (Table III). Muscular dystrophies, where an increase of CK, electrodiagnostic and bioptic abnormalities similar to PM -DM may be present, can be distinguished from DM -PM by the positive family history, the relatively early insidious onset and slow progression. Care should be taken also to exclude iatrogenic myopathy secondary to corticosteroids use, where CK is normal and the histological exam shows atrophic more than inflammatory changes of muscle fibers. The possibility of a steroid-induced myopathy should always be considered during steroid treatment, especially if there is no response to therapy.

Other diseases to consider in the differential diagnosis are: endocrine or dysionemia-induced myopathies and rheumatic polymyalgia, characterized by normal CK and absence of inflammatory histological abnormalities, as well as infectious myositis especially viral and parasitic myositis, the latter characterized by a diffuse muscular involvement and a subacute or chronic course. Bacterial myositis are localized and acute. Other rare inflammatory myopathies comprehend: (a) nodular focal myositis: it is considered a variant of PM -DM [57] and may present at onset [58]. When localized, a differential diagnosis with muscular cancers and/or thrombophlebitis has to be considered [59]. (b) Eosinophilic myositis: characterized by muscle eosinophil infiltrate [60], it may be part of a hypereosinophilic syndrome (pneumonia, endocardial and myocardial fibrosis, peripheral neuropathy, etc.) [61] or be associated with  [62] or Crohn's disease [63]. The main histological finding is the presence of granulomatous lesions which may contain epithelioid cells, histiocyte and Langerhans giant cells.

In the differential diagnoses of IBM, polyneuropathy and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis have also to be considered [64].

Therapy

The treatment of the inflammatory myopathies consists of corticosteroids, cytotoxic drugs and IVIg. All these drugs have non-selective effects on the immune system. Emerging evidence points to the efficacy of different immunosuppressive agents (mycophenolate mofetil and tacrolimus) and biological agents (etanercept, infliximab and anti-C5 monoclonal antibody). Up to now, however, high quality randomised controlled trials with immunosuppressant or immunomodulatory drugs in inflammatory myopathies are still lacking, as recently reviewed [65].

Steroids

Despite the lack of randomized controlled trials, corticosteroids remain the elective drugs for the treatment of PM -DM. Starting therapy consists of prednisone 1-2 mg/kg orally once a day up to a maximum of 100 mg daily. The dose is maintained for 2 -4 weeks and then gradually tapered monitoring the disease activity [66]. In some cases, IV methylprednisolone may be considered [67,68].

Immunosuppressants

Among the immunosuppressants, the first to be used was IV methotrexate [69]. Currently, methotrexate is preferably administered orally. Starting dosage is 7.5 mg weekly per os, in three divided doses 12 h apart and increased by 2.5 mg per week.

Other immunosuppressive drugs used in PM-DM are azathioprine (starting dose 50 mg daily orally, increased by 50 mg per week to a maximum dose of 2-3 mg/kg per day) and cyclophosphamide (1-2 mg/kg per day orally or 1 g/m 2 intravenously per month for 5-6 months) [70]. In some cases also cyclosporine A has been reported to be efficacious alone or in association with other immunosuppressants, also in patients unresponsive to steroids [71,72]. Combination of immunosuppressants (e.g. azathioprine and methotrexate, cyclosporine and methotrexate) can be used in aggressive cases in order to reach a better control of the disease with lower steroids dosage.

Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) specifically inhibits lymphocyte proliferation and is currently used for the prevention of renal allograft rejection. Recently, cases of inflammatory myopathies resistant to conventional immunosuppressants and responsive to MMF has been reported [73,74].

MMF is generally started at doses of 500 mg twice a day and titrated up to 1 g twice a day.

Monoclonal antibodies

Given the findings of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)alpha expression in the muscle of DM and PM [75], TNF-alpha inhibitors (infliximab and etanercept) have been proposed as potentially useful drugs. Successful treatment of two cases (one DM and one PM) with infliximab has been reported [76].

Rituximab is a chimeric monoclonal antibody against the CD20 antigen on B-cells. The B-cell depletion and the lack of relevant side effects have encouraged the use of rituximab also in diseases with non-malignant B-cell proliferation. In contrast to PM and IBM, humoral immune mechanisms seem to play a role in the pathogenesis of DM and cases of refractory DM responsive to rituximab have been reported [77,78]. A patient with refractory PM associated with interstitial pulmonary disease and anti-Jo-1 autoantibody (anti-tRNA synthetase antibodies syndrome) responsive to rituximab has also been described [79].

Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg)

IVIg are increasingly used in autoimmune neuromuscular disorders and they are second line therapy in DM [80]. They exert immunomodulant actions by regulating expression and function of Fc receptors, interfering with activation of complement and production of cytokines, providing anti-idiotypic antibodies and affecting the activation and effector functions of T and B-cells. Controlled clinical trials with IVIg have been performed in patients with DM and IBM. A doubleblind placebo-controlled study in DM patients, resistant or partially responsive to conventional therapies, showed that IVIg are very effective in improving both the muscle strength and the skin rash [81]. The total dose is 2 g/kg total, usually administered over two days, but may be spread out over five days. In the controlled trial for DM, IVIg had been repeated monthly for three months. The clinical benefit in DM was associated with improvement in the muscle cytoarchitecture. Quantitative histological studies in repeated muscle biopsies showed a statistically significant increase in the size of muscle fibers and the number of capillaries with normalization of the capillary diameter. In IBM, IVIg showed marginal and non-statistically significant, improvement in muscle strength [82,83]. Dysphagia had been reported to significantly improve after therapy with IVIg alone or in association with corticosteroids [84]. No controlled trials with IVIg have been performed in PM. However, small uncontrolled series have shown improvement in muscle strength in up to 70% of the IVIg-treated PM patients. Recently, a microarray study demonstrated that IVIg administration in inflammatory myopathies modulates a subset of clinically relevant immunoregulatory or structural genes associated with clinical improvement and restoration of muscle cytoarchitecture, thus providing further evidence for the immuno-mediated pathogenesis of inflammatory myopathies and providing new tools which might help identify markers predictive of response to therapy [12].

Plasma-exchange

Although plasma-exchange, in combination with steroids or immunosuppressive drugs and IVIg, had sporadically been shown to be useful in some cases or in uncontrolled series of patients with myositis [85], a controlled trial of plasma exchange and leukapheresis showed no benefits in PM and DM [86].

Physical therapy

Physical exercise and adequate muscular mobilization are recommended in order to maintain muscle strength and functionality, also in patients with active PM or DM [87].

Prognosis

The prognosis of the disease significantly improved after the introduction of steroids in the fifties. Early diagnosis and treatment are crucial for avoiding atrophic changes of the muscle with consequent loss of function. Factors predictive of a bad prognosis are old age at onset, bulbar, cardiac and pulmonary involvement and poor response to therapy [70]. CK levels and the extent of muscular involvement at onset do not seem to be determinant for the prognosis.

Table I .ICharacteristics of myositis specific antigen-antibody systems.AntibodyAntigenBiologic functionJo-1 PL-12 PL-7Histidyl-tRNA synthetase Alanyl-tRNA synthetase Threonyl-tRNA synthetase9 > > > > > > > =Esterification of the specific aa to its cognate tRNAEJ OJ KSGlycyl-tRNA synthetase Isoleucyl-tRNA synthetase Asparaginyl-tRNA synthetase> > > > > > > ;Mi-2Nuclear ATPase/helicaseRemodelling of nucleosomesSRPRibonucleoprotein (proteins-7SLRNA)Protein traslocation from ribosome into ERER ¼ endoplasmic reticulum; aa ¼ aminoacids.

Table II .IICharacteristics of myositis associated antigen-antibody systems.sites of trauma (EMG needles, surgery, etc.). Thereare two ways of performing the muscular biopsy. Theneedle muscular biopsy is less invasive, generally welltolerated and can therefore be repeated during thefollow-up. However, it provides a small quantity oftissue. The surgical open biopsy is the traditionaltechnique, which allows adequate samples for immu-nohistochemical, ultrastructural, biochemical andgenetic anatomo-pathological evaluation. As to thehistopathological findings, in DM the inflammation isperivascular or in the interfascicular septae andaround fascicles, the inflammatory infiltrate consistsprimarily of B-cells, macrophages and CD4 þ cells.AntibodyAntigenBiologic functionPM/SclMultiprotein complexBiogenesis of ribosomesKu Ro/SSA 52 Kda 9 > = Ro/SSA 60 Kda La/SSB > ;Heterodimer (p70/p80) of Ku-p350 complex RoRNP complex (proteins-hYRNA)DNA repair, phosphorylation of transcription factors Binding to DNA, transcription factors (?)U1/U2RNPsnRNP complex (proteins-mRNA)"splicing" of pre-mRNA

Table III .IIIMimics of inflammatory myopathies.eosinophilic fasciitis. (c) Granulomatous myositis: it canbe isolated or in the context of granulomatoussyndromes, such as sarcoidosisDrug or toxic myopathies:Alcohol, colchicine, statins, etc.Endocrine myopathies:Hyper-hypothyroidismMetabolic myopathiesMitochondrial myopathiesMuscular dystrophiesInfectious myositisNeuropathiesParaneoplastic syndromesOther connective tissue disordersMiscellaneousAmyloid, sarcoid

