Rimmed vacuoles with beta-amyloid and tau protein deposits in the muscle of children with hereditary myopathy

We investigated whether beta-amyloid and tau protein are involved in the formation of inclusion body myositis (IBM)-like inclusions found in children with rimmed vacuoles and congenitally aVected muscles. We immunostained muscle biopsy specimens from four children and one 18-year-old boy with congenital myopathy containing rimmed vacuoles and IBM-like inclusions with antibodies against beta-amyloid, tau protein and ubiquitin. Focal accumulations of both beta-amyloid and phosphorylated tau coexisted with tubuloWlamentous structures in all cases. Our studies demonstrate for the Wrst time that the full morphological phenotype of IBM including beta-amyloid and tau protein deposits may also develop in children, and that congenital, probably genetic, muscle defects may lead to abnormal protein aggregation in IBM-like inclusions.

Introduction

Sporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM) and hereditary inclusion body myopathy (h-IBM) are adult progressive muscular disorders characterized by nuclear and cytoplasmic inclusions and vacuolation of muscle Wbres.

AVected muscles contain beta-amyloid, phosphorylated tau protein and paired helical Wlaments (PHFs), all of which are pathological hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (AD) [1,4]. The pathogenesis of IBM is unknown but it has been proposed that AD and IBM are initiated by an aging-related structural transformation of soluble betaamyloid protein [2][3][4]. These diseases have been suggested to result from changes in protein conformation where normal innocuous proteins transform into insoluble amyloid Wbrils and are deposited in tissue [1,2].

We have recently noted the appearance of rimmed vacuoles, amyloid beta and tau protein deposits as well as tubuloWlamentous structures (TFs) within the muscle of children with diVerent neuromuscular diseases. To the best of our knowledge, beta-amyloid and tau protein have never been observed in the muscle in children. Such an unexpected Wnding may indicate that muscle aging is not the only factor responsible for this speciWc type of muscle destruction.

Case reports

Case 1

A girl (NW) aged 12 years was admitted to the Neurological Department because she exhibited a waddling gait and diYculty in climbing stairs and getting up from the Xoor. She was born at term following an uneventful pregnancy, but at birth she was noted to be Xoppy. The Wrst problem was noted at 6 weeks of age when the girl was found to have bilaterally dislocated hips. Following orthopaedic treatment, the hip dislocation improved but hypotonia persisted. A slight bilateral ptosis and diYculty in getting up from the Xoor was noted at 14 months of age. As she grew older, she had increasing diYculty in climbing stairs and arising from the Xoor without using her hands.

On examination she had slight bilateral ptosis (Fig. 1) with a little weakness of the facial muscles. A mild proximal weakness of the pelvic girdle muscles was also found. Her hands seemed normal. The knee and ankle reXexes were absent. She had a waddling gait with mild lordosis. Her parents and elder brother were healthy.

Laboratory studies showed slightly elevated CK level at 117 IU (normal 0-34 IU) and a normal pattern of EMG. The patient did not have a decremental EMG response and A. Fidziajska (&) • Z. Glinka Neuromuscular Unit MRC, Polish Academy of Science, Pawijskiego 5, 02-106 Warsaw, Poland E-mail: neurmyol@cmdik.pan.pl had a negative test with edrophonium chloride. Such results excluded the diagnosis of myasthenia gravis.

Case 2

A girl (KN) aged 9 years was admitted to the Neurological Department because her mother was worried about her contractures of both elbows. The father of the girl with cardiac pacemaker inserted at the age of 30 years had greater degree of elbow contractures and slowly progressive muscle weakness. The father's sister who was 41 years old suVered from the same disease.

Clinical examination revealed an intelligent thin girl with limited neck Xexion and slight contractures of the elbows and ankles. There was no wasting and no weakness.

In laboratory studies, ECG and Holter monitoring were normal. Her CK level was 488 IU. EMG examination showed a myopathic pattern. Genetic analysis of the patient and her father conWrmed the existence of a mutation (C1357 T, R453W) in LMNA gene and Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy type 2 was recognized.

Case 3

A boy (KM) aged 12 years was admitted to the Neurological Department because he had progressive muscle weakness and lumbar lordosis.

He was born at term following normal pregnancy and delivery. No abnormality was noticed during the Wrst 2 years of life. He began to have diYculty in rising from the Xoor and climbing stairs when aged 3. At the age of 5 years he developed ankle contractures. At the age of 9 years he developed elbow contractures and mild lordosis. His parents and two younger brothers were not aVected.

On examination he had limitation in Xexion of the neck, mild proximal weakness of the arms and legs and Xexion contracture of the elbows and ankles. The tendon reXexes were diminished. He presented waddling gait with marked lordosis and had marked diYculty in getting up from the Xoor.

Laboratory studies showed normal ECG, a myopathic pattern of EMG and elevated CK level at 436 IU.

Case 4

A girl (KK) aged 9 years was born after normal pregnancy and delivery. Her motor development in the neonatal period was normal but torticollis was observed at the age of 8 months and corrected at the age of 2 years. At about that time the parents noticed that she was not able to run or jump as other children did, and she had problems with getting up when she was sitting on the Xoor. As she grew older she had increasing diYculty in climbing stairs and arising from the Xoor. Her parents and older brother were not aVected.

Physical examination revealed a long face, high arched palate, slight bilateral ptosis and atrophy of both shoulders (Fig. 2). She walked with a waddling gait and had a slight lordosis. Her EMG examination showed a myopathic pattern. ECG was normal. CK level was also normal.

Case 5

An 18-year-old boy (BP) was seen due to a chief complaint of progressive muscle weakness for at least 3 years. As a child he was not able to match his peers in running or jumping. He was generally weaker than they were and had diYculty in climbing stairs. He denied any family history of muscle disease.

On examination he showed a high arched palate. He had atrophy and weakness of lower leg muscles proximally and distally but more pronounced distally.

Knee and ankle reXexes were absent. He could not walk on his heels and had slight diYculty in getting up from the Xoor.

His EMG examination showed a myopathic pattern. ECG was normal. CK level was elevated at 395 IU.

Materials and methods

Rectus femoris muscles were examined in all patients by light and electron microscopes. For light microscopy, serial frozen sections were stained according to standard techniques.

For indirect immunoXuorescence examinations 8 m cryostat sections were stained using monoclonal antisera against four epitopes of lamin AC (AC2, AC3, A4, AC5 diluted 1:10) kindly provided by Dr Hutchison, Department of Biological Science, University of Dundee, for speciWc identiWcation of nuclear membrane matrix components, as well as against anti-beta-amyloid (NCL-B), anti-phosphorylated tau protein (NCL-Tau 2) and ubiquitin (Novocastra).

In brief, antibodies diluted 1:50 were applied to tissue sections for 60 min. Sections were rinsed with PBS and incubated for further 30 min with the appropriate TRICconjugated secondary antibody (diluted 1:30 with PBS). After washing with PBS sections were mounted in gelmount and viewed with an Opton Zeiss standard LA B16 microscope equipped with epiXuorescence optics. Appropriate positive controls (brains of Alzheimer's disease patients) and negative controls (normal muscle tissues) were used.

For electron microscopy, muscle specimens were Wxed in glutaraldehyde in phosphate buVer and postWxed in a solution of 1% osmium tetroxide in the same buVer. They were dehydrated and embedded in Spurr resin. Ultrathin sections, double-stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate, were examined with a JEM 1,200 £ electron microscope.

Results

All investigated children exhibited myopathic changes of varying severity in the quadriceps muscle. In the mild cases (case nos. 1, 2, 5) variation of muscle Wbre size, increased central nuclei, split Wbres and small angulated Wbres were found. In more advanced cases (case nos. 3, 4) quadriceps muscle demonstrated scattered angulated atrophic Wbres of both type 1 and type 2, occasional necrotic Wbres with macrophage inWltration, occasional small foci of inXammatory inWltrates and mildly increased connective and fat tissues (Table 1). In addition, nuclei of muscle Wbres in case no. 2 were devoid of lamin AC3 and A4 with well-preserved lamin AC2, AC5 (Fig. 3a, b). In case no. 4, numerous core-like structures were observed in NADH-diaphorase staining (Fig. 4a), semithin section (Fig. 4b) and electron microscopy (Fig. 4c). In case no. 5, small lobulated Wbres 10-12 m in diameter provided 60% of all muscle Wbres and these were intermingled with muscle Wbres of normal diameter (Fig. 5). NADH-diaphorase staining revealed that lobulated Wbres were of type 1 and 8% of these Wbres had peripherally located ringbinden structures. In addition to myopathic changes presented above, single or multiple rimmed vacuoles were found in 15-20% of muscle Wbres. They were irregular or oval, of various sizes, located peripherally or centrally and were observed in angulated as well as normal size muscle Wbres (Fig. 6).

Immunohistochemical analysis showed that vacuolated as well as nonvacuolated Wbres contained immunoreactive inclusions with beta-amyloid (Fig. 7) and phosphorylated tau protein (Fig. 8). Some amyloid-decorated inclusions were located subsarcolemmally, while others were found deep within muscle Wbres. Tau-positive inclusions showed more intensive staining than those immunoreactive with beta-amyloid and were observed in 15-20% of muscle Wbres. In cases 1, 3 and 5, the number of inclusions was higher than in cases 2 and 4. Ubiquitinimmunoreactive plaque-like or linear inclusions of various sizes (Fig. 9) were observed in vacuolated as well as An intriguing pattern seen in case no. 3 with intranuclear PHFs was the appearance of ubiquitin immunore-activity forming a very thin rim surrounding the nuclei peripherally. In a few such nuclei delicate skein-like inclusions were observed (Fig. 10).

Ultrastructural examination revealed a collection of autophagic vacuoles Wlled with whorls of myelin-like Wgures, membrane fragments and cellular debris. In the vicinity of autophagic vacuoles, Wlamentous inclusions were frequently observed (Fig. 11). TubuloWlamentous structures of 16-21 m diameter were localized in the intraWbrillar (Fig. 12) as well as subsarcolemmal spaces. TFs collections were also visible within the nuclei in two (nos. 3, 5) cases. Large euchromatic nuclei containing a few TFs (Fig. 13a) and nuclei Wlled with multiple TFs were found in both cases. At higher magniWcation, TFs demonstrated distinct tubular proWles with an inner diameter of 4-6 nm (Fig. 13b). In addition, degenerate dark nuclei localized in muscle cells devoid of autophagic vacuoles were observed.

Discussion

The present study describes the clinical, morphological and immunohistochemical features of Wve children with early motor function disability. Clinical features of the presented children including the onset of the disease in early childhood, dysmorphic features, proximal muscle weakness, lordosis and joint contractures are suggestive of congenital myopathy. A congenital defect is also supported by muscle biopsy Wndings with lack of lamin AC, the appearance of core structures and predominance of small lobulated type 1 Wbres that might also represent developmental failure. The most striking pathological Wnding in our children was the appearance of rimmed vacuoles of various shapes, sizes and numbers.

The most surprising Wnding was the presence of immunoreactive inclusions for beta-amyloid, phosphorylated tau protein and ubiquitin in aVected muscle Wbres. Beta-amyloid and tau protein deposits appeared in the form of round or plaque-like inclusions while ubiquitinpositive accumulations were more diVuse and widespread. TFs were present in the vacuoles and vacuole-free sarcoplasm in all biopsy specimens. Nuclear TFs of the same size as cytoplasmic TFs were found only in two patients. The combination of sarcoplasmic vacuoles with betaamyloid, phosphorylated tau protein and ubiquitin-rich deposits and the presence of TFs in the muscle of our patients represent a diagnostic feature of inclusion body myopathy (IBM). IBM is a progressive muscle disorder [11] characterized by nuclear and cytoplasmic inclusions and vacuolation of muscle Wbres. AVected muscles contain beta-amyloid, phosphorylated tau protein and paired helical Wlaments, all of which are pathological hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease [2,4].

Intracellular protein aggregation into ubiquitin-rich cytoplasmic inclusions is linked to the pathogenesis of many aging-related neurodegenerative diseases, but the mechanism of protein aggregation is unknown [9,13]. Several causative mechanisms including abnormal betaamyloid metabolism, altered immunofunction and mitochondrial abnormalities have been proposed [9,12,13]. In our children, the onset of disease and clinical features diVer signiWcantly in a number of aspects from the usual presentation of IBM. A sporadic form of IBM begins most often in the sixth or seventh decade of life. The appearance of the IBM morphological phenotype in early childhood is extraordinary and, as far as we know, it has been reported until now in only three sporadic cases with congenital muscle defect [6,7,14].

In an autosomal dominant Swedish type of IBM with mutation in the myosin heavy chain IIa gene, aVected children had only minor unspeciWc morphological changes in their muscles and the appearance of rimmed vacuoles and amyloid-positive tubuloWlaments was observed at over 30 years of age [10]. The fact that full pathological changes in this form of IBM develop after the age of 30 years is in agreement with Askanas and Engel's [3] hypothesis that abnormal beta-amyloid accumulation is associated with aging-related decreased proteasome activity.

Aggregation of proteins is a nonspeciWc coalescence of incompletely folded or partially denaturated polypeptides. Within a cell, aggregated proteins are usually sequestrated into discrete structures called inclusion bodies. Inclusions contain numerous cytoskeletal proteins, including components of the ubiquitin-proteasome system [9,12]. Proteasome is a multicatalytic proteolytic complex which recognizes and degrades ubiquitinated proteins [8]. One of the hypotheses put forward to explain accumulations of altered proteins is the decrease of proteasome activity with age [13].

Recently, however, Ferrer et al. [5] investigated muscles of patients with IBM and myoWbrillar myopathy (MM) and showed that increased peptidase activities of 20S and 19S proteasome forms colocalized with abnormal protein deposits. Such results indicate that proteasome activity does not appear to be primarily impaired in IBM, while a partial blockade of proteasome by selected abnormal proteins accumulated in IBM cannot be excluded. All these data as well as our Wndings indicate that abnormal accumulation of both beta-amyloid and tau protein in aVected muscle is age-independent. The full morphological IBM phenotype may also develop in children and these congenital, probably genetic, muscle defects may lead to abnormal protein aggregation in the IBM-speciWc inclusions. Intracellular deposition of amyloid aggregates in ubiquitin-rich cytoplasmic inclusions is linked to the pathogenesis of many degenerative diseases [9,12]. This occurs as a consequence of mutation, deletion or other alterations in the protein primary structure which prevent correct folding or assembly into multimeric structures [9]. The accumulation of intracellular amyloid and phosphorylated tau proteins in children with congenital defects raises the possibility of a modiWcation of an abnormal muscle protein within an acid degenerative vacuolar compartment. It is possible that the end product of this modiWcation might acquire resistance to proteases and become amyloidogenic. The location of IBM-associated amyloid in our children favours a protein synthesized within the muscle cell. However, whether it represents an altered protein derived from a normal gene product or an isoform of a normal protein resulting from a gene mutation cannot be distinguished. Our results may provide novel insight into mechanisms by which altered degradation of muscle cell proteins may contribute to the pathogenesis of some congenital myopathies.

Acknowledgments

The study was supported by a grant from the State Committee for ScientiWc Research/KNB/No. 3P05D 017 25.

Fig. 1 - 3 Fig. 1 Fig. 21312Fig. 1-3 Fig. 1 Case no. 1. A girl 12 years old with myopathic face and slight bilateral ptosis. Fig. 2 Case no. 4. A girl 9 years old with a long face and atrophy of both shoulders. Fig. 3 Case no. 2. a Nuclei of muscle Wbres devoid of lamin AC3 and b well decorated by anti-lamin AC2. Bar = 1 m

Fig. 4 - 5 Fig. 4454Fig. 4-5 Fig. 4 Case no. 4. a Core-like structure seen in NADH staining. Bar = 0.5 m. b Semithin section in methylene blue staining. Bar = 1 m. c Core-like structure seen at electron microscopy. Fig. 5 Case no. 5. Small muscle Wbres intermingled with muscle Wbres of normal diameter. NADH. Bar = 0.5 m

Fig. 6 - 8 Fig. 6 a 7 a6867Fig. 6-8 Fig. 6 a Case no. 2. b Case no. 3. Rimmed vacuoles of various sizes are located peripherally or centrally. HE. Bar = 0.5 m. Fig. 7 a Case no. 2. b Case no. 3. c Case no. 4. Immunoreactive deposits of beta-amyloid seen in muscle Wbres. Bar = 1 m. Fig. 8 a Case no. 1. b Case no. 3. c Case no. 4. Tau-immunoreactive inclusions seen in muscle Wbres of aVected cases. Bar = 1 m

Fig. 9 - 11 Fig. 9 a9119Fig. 9-11 Fig. 9 a Case no. 3. b Case no. 4. c Case no. 5. Ubiquitin-positive deposits show less intense and more diVuse reactivity. Bar = 1 m. Fig. 10 Case no. 3. Ubiquitin reactivity seen as a ring surrounding nuclei (arrow). Bar = 1 m. Fig. 11 Autophagic vacuole peripherally located containing myelin-like structures and tubuloWlamentous inclusions (asterisk). Bar = 1 m

Fig. 12 - 13 Fig. 12121312Fig. 12-13 Fig. 12 TubuloWlamentous structures embedded within myoWbrils (asterisk). Bar = 1 m. Fig. 13 Case no. 3. a DiVerently oriented TFs seen within nuclear matrix. Bar = 500 nm. b TFs at higher magniWcation. Bar = 200 nm

Table 11Morphological abnormalities in muscle specimens of aVected childrenCaseAgeOnsetFibre sizeInXammationFibrosisOther abnormalityRimmedCytoplasmicNuclearvariationvacuolesinclusionsinclusionsNW122+¡¡-+ ++ +¡KN97+¡¡Lack lamin AC3, A4++¡KM122+++++-+++++KK92++¡Core-like structures+++¡BP183++¡¡Small lobulated Wbres+++++

