Elevated levels of amyloid precursor protein in muscle of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and a mouse model of the disease

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease defined by motor neuron loss. Transgenic mouse models show features that closely mimic those seen in the clinical situation, reflected in the molecular changes observed in mouse models and in tissues from patients. We report a dramatic increase in the expression of amyloid precursor protein (APP) in the hindlimb muscles, but not the spinal cord of the G93A transgenic mouse model, significantly before the appearance of clinical abnormalities. APP levels were unchanged in nontransgenic mice and in mice overexpressing human wild-type Cu/Zn-dependent superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1). Preliminary results indicate a similar change in APP expression in human deltoid muscle samples from ALS patients compared with age-matched controls. The inhibitory role of APP in innervation at the neuromuscular junction and increased expression in inclusion-body myositis suggest that presymptomatic upregulation of APP may be consistent with a potential role for APP in ALS pathology.

by degeneration of upper and lower motor neurons, and muscle atrophy leading to muscle weakness. Failure of pulmonary function and death usually ensue within 5 years of the first appearance of symptoms. 6 Approximately 10% of ALS cases are familial, and mutations in the cytoplasmic Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) gene account for approximately 20% of these. 6 To date, more than 100 different SOD1 mutations are known. Much of ALS research has involved transgenic animal models expressing human SOD1 carrying disease-linked mutations. 35 Despite the fact that mutations in SOD1 have been found in a small percentage of all ALS cases, a key advantage of these models is that they offer the opportunity to study cellular, neurological, and biochemical changes in the presymptomatic stages of the disease, making it possible to delineate the disease-initiating processes. 15,35 The majority of the disease-linked mutations in SOD1 do not affect enzyme activity as compared with wild-type SOD1, suggesting that the pathology is not induced by a failure to clear reactive oxygen species. 24 Furthermore, studies in mice that overexpress wild-type SOD1 have shown variable effects ranging from a complete absence of motor neuron disease to a modest impairment in motor performance at advanced age, 8,15,17,31 whereas targeted deletion of SOD1 has no deleterious effect. 25 These observations have led to general agreement that mutations in SOD1 induce ALS pathology due to a gain of toxic function. 6,15 However, the precise mechanism by which mutant SOD1 induces ALS pathology in ALS or induces ALS-like symptoms in transgenic mouse models is unknown. 6 Most transgenic mouse models express the mutant human SOD1 in the same tissues as SOD1 is expressed in humans. The ubiquitous tissue expression means that it is unclear whether any particular cell type is more important than others in the neurodegenerative process. Surprisingly, studies have shown that specific neuronal or astrocytic expression of mutant SOD1 in transgenic animals does not result in motor neuron degeneration, apparently eliminating them as the sole mediators of pathology. 14,19 Structural changes in muscle and loss of neuromuscular junctions are common in both ALS mice and patients, 11,12,36 raising the possibility that changes in muscle rather than neurons or astrocytes are key early events in the pathogenesis of ALS.

Research on amyloid precursor protein (APP) has largely focused on its role in Alzheimer's disease, because mutations in APP are associated with familial forms of the disease. 28 There also appears to be a general involvement of the APP-processing pathway in neurodegeneration. 10 In skeletal muscle, APP has been localized to the base of the postsynaptic folds of the neuromuscular junction, but its function is unclear. 4 Increased levels of APP have been detected in the muscles of patients with inclusion-body myositis, where it seems to play a pathogenic role. 3 Overexpression of APP in transgenic mice using a musclespecific promoter induces a phenotype resembling inclusion-body myositis, 29 and overexpression in cells, using a viral delivery system, inhibits innervation in vitro. 21 These findings have led to the suggestion that APP has a central role in the pathology of inclusion-body myositis. 3 In addition, BACE1, a key protease in the generation of ␤-amyloid peptide (A␤) from APP, is also overexpressed in the muscles of patients with inclusion-body myositis. 32 Given a clear pathogenic role for A␤ in Alzheimer's disease and a potential pathogenic role for APP and A␤ in inclusion-body myositis, we examined the expression of APP and APP-processing enzymes, BACE1 and presenilin 1 (PS1), in the muscles of ALS patients and a mouse model of ALS.

METHODS

Human Muscle Samples.

Human deltoid muscle biopsies were obtained by standard surgical procedure from six patients attending the ALS Center of the Pitie ´-Salpe ˆtrie `re Hospital (Paris, France). The patients (four men and two women) had probable or definite sporadic ALS in accordance with the World Federation of Neurology criteria. 5 One had bulbaronset and five had limb-onset disease. Their mean age was 60.7 years (range, 35-79 years). Mean duration of the disease was 32.3 months (range, 6.7-58.6 months). The control group included four men and two women without any significant neurological history (mean age, 64 years; range, 39 -82 years), whose deltoid muscle specimens were taken during orthopedic surgery. Samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at Ϫ80°C until analyzed. The study was approved by the local ethics committee, and patients signed an informed consent document consistent with institutional guidelines.

Mouse Tissues. G1H mice [B6SJL-TgN(SOD1-G93A)1Gur] carrying approximately 25 copies of the G93A mutant allele of human SOD1 (referred hereafter as ALS mice) were obtained from Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, Maine). 7,15 Nontransgenic littermates served as wild-type controls, and B6SJL-TgN(SOD1)2Gur mice (Jackson Laboratories) served as controls overexpressing wild-type human SOD1. Brain, spinal cord, and lower forelimb arm and hindlimb (gastrocnemius) muscle tissues were dissected from 34 -132-day-old mice, briefly rinsed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and frozen in liquid nitrogen prior to biochemical analyses. For immunohistochemical studies, samples were fixed for 2 days in 3% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.4. All experiments complied with the UK Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act of 1986 and strictly conformed to GlaxoSmithKline ethical standards.

Immunoblotting. Human tissues were homogenized in PBS containing 1% Nonidet P40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS), 0.5% aprotinin, 5 mM dithiothreitol, and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride. Homogenates were boiled for 5 min and sonicated for 30 seconds. Mouse tissues were mechanically homogenized in lysis buffer [50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, containing 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, and protease inhibitors (Complete Mini; Roche, Lewes, UK)]. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation and protein concentration was determined using a bicinchoninic acid assay or the DC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, California). Tissue lysates were subjected to SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), transferred to nitrocellulose, and probed with specific antibodies as follows: anti-actin (C4; ICN Biomedicals, Aurora, OH), 1:1000; anti-APP (CT695; Zymed, San Francisco, California), 1 g/ml for mouse APP immunoblotting; chicken anti-APP against peptide fragment APP66-81, 20 1:500 for human APP immunoblotting; anti-BACE1 monoclonal 9B21, 16 1 g/ml; and anti-SOD1 PC077 (The Binding Site, Birmingham, UK), 1 g/ml. Bound antibodies were detected using horseradish peroxidasecoupled secondary antibodies (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) and enhanced chemiluminescence. Equal loading of mouse samples was confirmed by Ponceau S staining and immunoblotting for actin. Equal loading of human samples was confirmed by Ponceau S staining. The relative optical density of immunoreactive bands was quantified using Multi-Analyst and Molecular Analyst software (both from Bio-Rad).

Amyloid Immunoassay. Levels of rodent ␤-amyloid peptides (A␤ 40 and A␤ 42) in hindlimb muscle lysates of 34 -110-day-old wild-type and ALS mice were measured using a sensitive sandwich-type immunoassay. Muscle tissues were lysed using lysis buffer or 5 M guanidine hydrochloride in PBS, containing protease inhibitors (Complete Mini, Roche). After tenfold dilution in assay buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl at pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.05% Tween-20, 1% bovine serum albumin), samples contained 2.2 Ϯ 1.3 mg protein/ml (lysis buffer lysates) or 2.3 Ϯ 1.0 mg protein/ml (guanidine buffer lysates). The levels of A␤ 40 and A␤ 42 were measured in these extracts using a sensitive immunoassay (BioVeris, Gaithersburg, MD) employing A␤ C-terminal specific antibodies. Briefly, A␤ peptides were captured using biotinylated G49 (Signet Laboratories, Dedham, Massachusetts). BioVeris-tagged 5G5 and G210 (The Genetics Co., Schlieren, Switzerland) antibodies were used to detect the specific A␤ species. Antibody-A␤ complexes were captured with streptavidincoated Dynabeads (BioVeris) and assayed in an M8 analyzer. Standard curves were constructed using rodent A␤ 40 and A␤ 42 peptides in assay buffer containing 0.5 M guanidine hydrochloride. Data was analyzed using Prism software (GraphPad Software, San Diego, California).

Immunohistochemical Staining. Phosphate-buffered, paraformaldehyde-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues were stained using 5 g/ml anti-APP antibody (CT695, Zymed) and the Envisionϩ System (Dako). Briefly, 5-m sections were dewaxed and dehydrated, followed by 5-min proteinase K treatment to retrieve antigen. Sections were treated for 5 min with peroxidase block (Dako) and incubated for 10 -20 min with serum-free protein block (Dako). Primary antibody was incubated for 1 h at room temperature or overnight at 4°C, followed by 30 -40-min incubation with anti-rabbit antibodies conjugated with horseradish peroxidase-labeled polymer, and DABϩ substrate-chromogen (all by the Dako Envisionϩ System). SOD1 Activity Assay. SOD1 activity was measured in tissue lysates (1 g protein/ml lysis buffer), which were diluted 1:20 in 2.1% SDS to inhibit Mn-SOD activity. 13 After 30-min incubation at 37°C, SOD1 activity was measured using the WST SOD Assay Kit (Dojindo Molecular Technologies, Tokyo, Japan). Pure SOD1 enzyme from Sigma (St. Louis, Missouri) was used as a standard.

Quantitative RT-PCR. Messenger RNA was quantitated by TaqMan RT-PCR as described previously. 22 RNA was extracted from frozen tissues using Trizol (Invitrogen, Paisley, UK) and 1 g was transcribed using Superscript II reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen) and an oligo-dT primer. Each cDNA synthesis reaction was performed in triplicate and an additional negative control reaction was performed without reverse transcriptase. Primers and fluorogenic probes are shown in Table 1. ␤-actin, cyclophilin, and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase were used to normalize expression levels.

Identification of Splice Variants by RT-PCR. For detection of APP and BACE1 splice variants, primers flanking specific intron-exon junctions were de- Rat ␤-actin, cyclophilin, and GAPDH primers and probes are described elsewhere. 22 signed: APP: 5Ј AGT GAA GAC AAA GTA GTA GAA GT 3Ј (sense primer) and 5Ј GCC TCT CTT TGG CTT TCT GG 3Ј (antisense primer); BACE1: 5Ј AGG CAG CTG TCC AGC ACA TA 3Ј (sense) and 5Ј TCA TAA TAC CAC TCC CGC CG 3Ј (antisense). RT-PCR was performed using cDNA prepared as for quantitative RT-PCR. Reactions were carried out using a PCR reaction mix (REDTaq ReadyMix; Sigma).

RESULTS

We examined the muscle and spinal cord of the [B6SJL-TgN(SOD1-G93A)1Gur] mice, the mouse model of ALS, and found significant, 3.4 -4-fold increases in the levels of APP in the hindlimb (gastrocnemius) muscle at 70 days of age (Fig. 1A), which is approximately 3 weeks before the first appearance of clinical signs. This elevation was not detectable in animals aged 45 days (Fig. 1A), but became detectable at day 60 and was pronounced by day 70 (Fig. 1A, G93A, and data not shown). Increased APP levels were confirmed with additional antibodies that recognize the amyloid domain (1E8), 2 an N-terminal epitope (22C11 that also recognizes the APP homolog APLP2), 34 and a C-terminal epitope of APP (Ab54). 18 By contrast, in nontransgenic wild-type mice (Fig. 1A, NT) or control mice overexpressing wild-type human SOD1, APP levels remained low, even in animals over 100 days of age (Fig. 1B, wtSOD, and data not shown). In the spinal cord, although the overall levels of APP were consistently higher than in the muscle, no differences in protein level between ALS and wild-type control mice were detected (Fig. 1A).

Immunohistochemical staining showed that APP was localized throughout the muscle fibers, the staining being more intense in atrophied muscle cells than in wild-type mouse muscles (Fig. 1C). SOD1 protein levels and enzymatic activity in all transgenic tissues studied (brain, spinal cord, and lower forelimb arm and hindlimb gastrocnemius muscle) were constant with respect to age, being much higher in transgenic than in corresponding wild-type mouse tissues (Fig. 1A and data not shown).

To confirm the identity of the APP isoform expressed in muscle, we carried out RT-PCR reactions and the results indicated that the primary APP transcript in muscle was the APP770 isoform; the shorter isoform (APP695) was expressed in spinal cord and brain (Fig. 2A). To determine whether the higher APP protein level observed in ALS mouse muscle was due to an elevation of mRNA levels, we carried out quantitative PCR reactions. We used Nogo-A as a positive control as it is an example of an mRNA that is significantly upregulated in ALS. 9 We found that APP mRNA levels in ALS mouse muscle were increased 1.7-fold, which, although significant, was less than the 8.4-fold upregulation of Nogo-A found here (Fig. 2B). In contrast, messenger RNA levels of PS1 [mutant G93A wild-type SOD1 transgene and endogenous mouse SOD1 (mSOD1)] proteins in hindlimb muscle and spinal cord lysates of ALS mice (G93A) and mice expressing wild-type human SOD1. For A and B, 25 g or 10 g protein extracted from hindlimb muscles or spinal cords, respectively, were applied to each lane of SDS-PAGE gel, except for SOD1 immunoblotting 10 g protein/lane was used for all samples. (C) Immunohistochemical staining of APP in hindlimb muscle of ALS (G93A) and nontransgenic (NT) control mice. Inset in G93A panel represents a negative control in which preimmune rabbit immunoglobulin was used instead of APP antibody. All samples are from 104day-old mice. Scale bar ϭ 50 m. and BACE1 did not differ significantly between wildtype and ALS mice (Fig. 2B) and, although expressed, no changes in BACE1 protein levels could be detected. BACE1 expressed in the muscles is likely to represent the active form of the enzyme as RT-PCR showed that the majority of BACE1 transcripts corresponded to mRNA encoding the full length-that is, the proteolytically active, BACE1 isoform (Fig. 2A)-rather than the alternatively spliced enzymatically inactive isoforms. 30 Despite the increase in APP levels and the presence of mature BACE1, we detected very low levels of A␤ in muscle tissue using a sensitive immunoassay. As the pathology progressed in the ALS mouse tissue, these low levels of A␤ did not change compared to wild-type mouse tissue.

In order to determine whether similar changes in APP levels could be detected in the muscle of ALS patients, we obtained deltoid muscle biopsy material from six sporadic ALS patients and six controls, and analyzed the levels of APP in the tissue by immunoblotting. The results showed approximately fourfold higher APP levels in human ALS muscle than in age-matched controls (Fig. 3), quantitatively similar to the increase we detected in ALS mice.

DISCUSSION

In this styudy we have reported an increase in APP level in the muscles of the G93A SOD1 mouse model of ALS. This increase preceded the onset of disease signs, such as altered gait and shaking or tremor in the hindlimbs, 7 by at least 20 days. Similarly, markedly higher APP levels were observed in the deltoid muscles of patients with sporadic ALS, as compared with non-ALS individuals who had no significant neurological history.

Different isoforms of APP are expressed in a tissue-specific manner. Of the major isoforms, APP770 and APP751 are expressed in virtually all peripheral tissues and the adult brain, whereas APP695 is particularly enriched in the nervous system. 26 Our results suggest the same isoform distribution in the ALS mouse model, indicating that there was no switch in the APP isoform associated with pathology.

Studies of the chronology of molecular and pathological changes in a number of ALS mouse models has provided a clear progression of events that precede the appearance of physical signs in the animals. 6,7,15,35 Such analyses have the potential to identify the earliest events in disease progression and hence potential therapeutic targets. The increases in APP and BACE1 transcripts were detected in ALS (G93A) and nontransgenic (NT) mouse hindlimb muscles by RT-PCR using primers flanking alternatively spliced exons. APP was also detected in mouse spinal cord and brain. (B) Messenger RNA levels in 85-90-day-old ALS mice (G93A) hindlimb muscles in relation to expression in NT control mice, as detected by quantitative RT-PCR. Levels are expressed as percentage of expression in nontransgenic mice. Bars represent mean ϩ SD. n ϭ 3 for transgenic and n ϭ 2 for nontransgenic mouse tissues. APP and Nogo-A expression are significantly higher in transgenic mouse muscle (P Ͻ 0.02 for both, t-test). APP levels that we observed occur very early in the disease process; the only earlier change in the muscle that has been documented in this model is the degeneration of neuromuscular junctions. 11 The focus of pathological analysis has been the motor neuron and, consequently, the majority of documented presymptomatic changes have been reported for this tissue. These changes include vacuolation and mitochondrial swelling, fragmentation of the Golgi apparatus, and appearance of neurofilament-rich inclusions. 7,23 Therefore, it is generally thought that the pathology originates from the degeneration of these cells. However, some of these early changes in motor neurons have also been found in transgenic mice overexpressing wild-type SOD1. 8 These mice do not develop ALS-like signs, suggesting that not all of these changes are relevant to the pathology. We have found that, even at an advanced age, mice overexpressing wild-type human SOD1 had similar APP levels to nontransgenic wild-type control mice or young ALS mice. This suggests that higher APP levels in the muscle are linked to the gain of toxic function caused by the mutation in SOD1, rather than the overexpression of SOD1 protein or increases in SOD1 activity. Our results, coupled with recent studies showing that motor neuron or astrocyte-restricted expression of mutant SOD1 is not sufficient to cause signs of ALS in mice, 14,19 has led us to suggest that changes in muscles are important in the pathogenetic cascade leading to ALS. Clearly, the generation of a mouse model using a muscle-specific promoter to drive expression of mutant SOD1 would be particularly valuable.

Our results, and the observations that APP mRNA and protein levels are increased in the developing neuromuscular junction and in regenerating muscles in a variety of neuromuscular and muscle diseases, 27 raise the question of the significance of the elevated levels of APP in muscle. A clue may be found in studies of inclusion-body myositis in which many pathological changes, including overexpression of APP and the presence of A␤ deposits and hyperphosphorylated tau in the form of paired helical filaments, have been reported in muscles, suggesting interesting parallels between Alzheimer's disease and inclusion-body myositis. 4 It has been proposed that, in inclusion-body myositis, overexpression of APP occurring within the aging muscle fibers is an early upstream event that induces the subsequent pathological cascade. 4 Muscle-specific overexpression of APP in transgenic mice using the muscle creatine kinase promoter induces a phenotype resembling inclusion-body myositis, although the levels of A␤ are very low. 29 These results are consistent with our findings and suggest that elevation of APP levels in inclusion-body myositis and in ALS could have direct pathogenic effects, independent of the level of A␤. This is also consistent with in vitro data in cultured human muscle cells in which overexpression of APP using viral vectors prevented the formation of neuromuscular junctions by inhibiting their innervation. 21 Therefore, the weight of this evidence is consistent with a pathogenic role for elevated levels of APP.

A complex pattern of denervation, reinnervation, and compensatory sprouting has been found to take place in skeletal muscles before detectable loss of motor neurons in the spinal cord. 7,11,12 It has also been shown that, after early loss of axons, there is an increase in axon number late in the pathology in the G93A model. 11 Therefore, it is also possible that APP plays a positive role in the reinnervation and sprouting process, consistent with the demonstration of neurotrophic properties of the protein. 28,33 There is currently insufficient data to allow us to discriminate unambiguously between a positive, protective role for APP and a pathological role. However, experimental short-term denervation by axotomy induces a decline, rather than an elevation, in APP levels in intramuscular nerves and the neuromuscular junction, 1 indicating that the elevated APP levels in the G93A mouse muscle represent a positively regulated, early response in pathogenesis.

As higher APP levels have also been reported in other muscle and neuromuscular diseases, APP might not represent an ALS-specific marker, 3,27 but we suggest that APP might be useful as a presymptomatic diagnostic muscle biopsy marker in high-risk individuals, such as those having several family members with ALS.

The authors thank Dr. David Virley and Marion Perren for their assistance in mouse tissue collection, and GSK Laboratory Animal Sciences for animal husbandry, particularly Judith Latcham. H. Koistinen was supported by a Marie Curie Fellowship from the European Union, and S. J. Banner by the Motor Neurone Disease Association. J. P. Loeffler's laboratory is supported by the Association pour la Recherche sur la Scle ´rose Late ´rale Amyotrophique (ARS) and the Association pour la Recherche contre les Maladies Neurode ´ge ´ne ´ratives (AREMANE).

FIGURE 1 .1FIGURE 1. (A)Immunoblots showing APP, actin (loading control), and SOD1 [mutant G93A SOD1 transgene and endogenous mouse SOD1 (mSOD1)] proteins in hindlimb muscle and spinal cord lysates of ALS mice (G93A) and wild-type nontransgenic mouse (NT) controls. SOD1 activity (U/ml) was measured by colorimetric assay. (B) Immunoblots showing APP and SOD1 [mutant G93A wild-type SOD1 transgene and endogenous mouse SOD1 (mSOD1)] proteins in hindlimb muscle and spinal cord lysates of ALS mice (G93A) and mice expressing wild-type human SOD1. For A and B, 25 g or 10 g protein extracted from hindlimb muscles or spinal cords, respectively, were applied to each lane of SDS-PAGE gel, except for SOD1 immunoblotting 10 g protein/lane was used for all samples. (C) Immunohistochemical staining of APP in hindlimb muscle of ALS (G93A) and nontransgenic (NT) control mice. Inset in G93A panel represents a negative control in which preimmune rabbit immunoglobulin was used instead of APP antibody. All samples are from 104day-old mice. Scale bar ϭ 50 m.

FIGURE 2 .2FIGURE 2. (A)Detection of APP and BACE1 splice variants. APP and BACE1 transcripts were detected in ALS (G93A) and nontransgenic (NT) mouse hindlimb muscles by RT-PCR using primers flanking alternatively spliced exons. APP was also detected in mouse spinal cord and brain. (B) Messenger RNA levels in 85-90-day-old ALS mice (G93A) hindlimb muscles in relation to expression in NT control mice, as detected by quantitative RT-PCR. Levels are expressed as percentage of expression in nontransgenic mice. Bars represent mean ϩ SD. n ϭ 3 for transgenic and n ϭ 2 for nontransgenic mouse tissues. APP and Nogo-A expression are significantly higher in transgenic mouse muscle (P Ͻ 0.02 for both, t-test).

FIGURE 3 .3FIGURE 3. APP immunoblot of deltoid muscle lysates of human ALS patients and controls, and respective quantitation of immunoreactive APP (*P Ͻ 0.05). Equal amounts of total protein were loaded on each lane.

Table 1 .1Oligonucleotide primers and fluorogenic probes used in quantitative RT-PCR.APPSense5Ј AGC CCA GAA TCA GCT ACG GAA 3ЈAntisense5Ј GCT CCA CGG TGG TCT TGG TT 3ЈProbe5Ј ACG CTC TCA TGC CTT CGC TGA CG 3ЈBACE1Sense5Ј CTT GCC ATG TGC ACG ATG AG 3ЈAntisense5Ј CAG TCT TCC ATG TCT GCC GTA AC 3ЈProbe5Ј CCT TCC ACT GCC GCC GTC CTG 3ЈPS1Sense5Ј CAG TGG TTC TGG GAA CGA TGA 3ЈAntisense5Ј AGG CCC CAG GTG ACT GTC TC 3ЈProbe5Ј CCT CCC ACT CCT CAC TGA AGC CAC 3ЈNogo-ASense5Ј TTG GTC CAA ACA TCA GAA GCT ATACA 3ЈAntisense5Ј GGA GTT GCT TCA GCT TCC TCA A 3ЈProbe5Ј CCA CAG CAC AGC TTT GCC CAT CA 3Ј

