Frontotemporal dementia The post-tau era

As scientists have begun to decipher the molecular genetic bases of hereditary frontotemporal dementia (FTD), it has become clear that the biology of these human neurodegenerative diseases has a complexity not previously suspected. FTD has been found to be linked to several chromosomal loci including those in chromosome 9, chromosome 17, and chromosome 3.

The article by Guyant-Mare ´chal et al. in this issue of Neurology reports the clinical, pathologic, and molecular characteristics of a form of FTD associated with inclusion body myopathy and Paget disease of the bone observed in members of two families and expands our knowledge on genetically determined FTD. 1 The disorder is associated with mutations in the valosin-containing protein (VCP) gene located in chromosome 9q21.1-p12. 2,3 Guyant-Mare ´chal et al. elucidate and compare the phenotypic characteristics associated with the R93C and R155C mutations in exon 3 of the VCP gene. VCP plays a role in the ubiquitin-proteasome dependent degradation of cytosolic proteins and in the retrotranslocation of misfolded proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum into the cytoplasm. VCP mutations disrupt normal VCP functions leading to the accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins within cells and to the alteration of the ubiquitin-proteasome system. VCP is considered a chaperone protein with widespread expression in numerous cell types and organs, thus prompting a multiorgan type of disease. Neurons as well as cells of the muscle, liver, and bone are affected by the mutation in VCP.

Aggregation of the VCP in nerve cells, muscle fibers, and hepatocytes is the common morphologic link in this multiorgan disease. This condition may be considered a member of the growing number of protein aggregate diseases, which includes Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, and prion diseases. This condition would also be one of the protein aggregate myopathies, which include the myofibrillar myopathies 4 and the inflammatory and hereditary inclusion body myopathies. While certain protein aggregate myopathies and protein aggregate diseases have in common an aggregated protein, such as ␤-amyloid and prion protein, they are separate disease entities. The disorder associated with VCP mutations is one of the first protein aggregate disease entities that have the same aggregated protein affecting different cell types in different tissues. Guyant-Mare ´chal et al. convincingly show that the same VCP aggregates extralysosomally in these different cell types. 1 In these two families, VCP aggregates in neurons were ubiquitin-negative, whereas in other forms of FTD ubiquitin-positive inclusions are prominent. 5 Whether other proteins co-aggregate, perhaps differing in composition among the VCP aggregates in different types of cells, remains to be elucidated. Although not always explicitly described, 6 aggregation of the VCP in muscle fibers appears to be a consistent feature 7 and the ultrastructure of these protein aggregates conforms to that of myofibrillar myopathies. However, intranuclear VCP inclusions 7 do not seem to be consistently present and the ubiquitin immunopositivity appears to vary between intranuclear and intracytoplasmic neuronal inclusions indicating subtle differences in the processing of VCP.

In addition to the VCP gene in chromosome 9, there are other genes that are candidates for being related to forms of familial ALS with frontotemporal dementia. A form of this disorder linked to a locus on chromosome 9p13.2-21.3 is clinically characterized by the onset of motor symptoms followed by personality and behavioral abnormalities between the fourth and seventh decade. 8 Neuropathologically, upper and lower motor neuron degeneration as well as ubiquitinated inclusions are found in the anterior horn cells and granular layer of the hippocampus.

A region in chromosome 17 has been linked to FTD. Mutations in the MAPT gene, located in chromosome 17q21.1, are associated with FTD syndromes group under the name frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17). 9 The clinical and pathologic phenotypes vary among mutations. Approximately 40 mutations have been found in the coding region (exons 1, 9 -13) as well as in the introns following exons 9 and 10. Studies have elucidated the pathogenetic mechanisms, showing that mutant tau affects the assembly and stability of microtubules. As a consequence, neuronal and cellular transport, particularly the axoplasmic transport, becomes impaired, resulting in axonal damage and loss of neuronal connectivity.

Several families with frontotemporal dementia show definite linkage to the same region on chromosome 17 as the MAPT gene; however, no MAPT mutations have been found. 10 Clinically, affected individuals present progressive changes in personality, behavior, or language in the sixth and seventh decade followed by impairment of executive function and deficit of memory retrieval. Rigidity, bradykinesia, and motor neuron disease may be seen. Neuropathologically, neuronal inclusions are immunoreactive for ubiquitin. Recently, it has been found that in affected individuals of these families, FTD is caused by mutations in the Granulin (GRN) gene. This gene is located 1.7 Mb centrometric of MAPT on chromosome 17q21.32 and encodes granulin, a growth factor involved in the regulation of multiple process including development, would repair, and inflammation. GRN mutations associated with FTD are predicted to cause the nonsense mediated decay of the mutant RNAs, thus creating a null allele. 11,12 A dominant form of FTD has been mapped to a pericentromeric region of 12 cM on chromosome 3. 13 Mutations have been found in the charged multivesicular body protein 2B (CHMP2B) gene, which encodes a component of the endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRTIII complex). The disorder (FTD3) has an onset in the sixth decade and is characterized by behavioral and personality changes, disinhibition and hyperorality, stereotyped behaviors, nonfluent aphasia, mutism, and dystonia. Neuropathologically, there is global cortical and central atrophy; however, ␤ amyloid deposits and tau deposits have not been found. It remains to be defined whether ubiquitin immunopositive inclusions are present.

There is now evidence that genetic defects involving genes encoding proteins that have different functions such as structural, cell cycle, apoptosis, and endosomal sorting complexes are the etiologic basis for the various types of hereditary FTD. With this being the case, it is clear that there is no single pathway leading to the cellular and anatomic damage seen in FTD. The discovery of the genes involved in the familial forms of FTD may give some clues to the pathologic mechanisms involved in the sporadic forms, thus paving the way for the development of therapeutic strategies.

See also page 644

