Mechanisms of Disease: signaling pathways and immunobiology of inflammatory myopathies

On the basis of clinical, histologic, and immunopathologic criteria, the most clearly defined inflammatory myopathies include polymyositis, dermatomyositis, and sporadic inclusion-body myositis (IBM). [1][2][3][4][5] Dermatomyositis affects children and adults, has a subacute onset, and patients present with proximal muscle weakness and typical skin changes. Polymyositis is a subacute myopathy that affects adults and, rarely, children; patients present with proximal muscle weakness. As a stand-alone entity, polymyositis is rare and is most often seen in association with systemic autoimmune or connective-tissue diseases. 1,4  IBM is the most common myopathy in patients over 50 years of age, but it is commonly mis diagnosed as polymyositis. 1,4,5  IBM affects proximal and distal muscles, and the progression of disease is slow. 5  The hallmark histopathologic markers common to all these disorders are inflammation of the endomysium (the delicate sheath of reticular fibrils that surrounds each muscle fiber), muscle-fiber necrosis, and fibrosis. 6  Although the immunopathology of these dis orders is not yet understood, the distinct patterns that are unique to polymyositis, dermatomyositis, or IBM offer insights into the complexities of the underlying inflammatory process. This Review summarizes the progress made during the past 10 years in our understanding of the immunobiologic mechanisms, signaling pathways, and immunoregulatory genes involved in the pathogenesis of these dis orders.

IMMUNOGENETICS

Genetic factors have a role in the pathogenesis of these chronic myopathies, as demonstrated by rare familial occurrences and by the association of these myopathies with certain HLA genes, especially HLA-DRB1*0301 alleles. 3,7,8   The HLA-DQA1*0501 allele might confer a genetic risk for juvenile dermatomyositis, and the TNF 308A polymorphism of tumor-necrosis factor (TNF) superfamily member 2 might contribute to the photosensitivity observed in The signaling pathways involved in the immunobiology of polymyositis, dermatomyositis, and inclusion-body myositis are outlined in this Review, which is based on research performed during the past 10 years. In dermatomyositis, the complement cascade is activated and the expression of cytokines and chemokines is upregulated. In polymyositis and inclusion-body myositis, autoinvasive CD8 + T cells are clonally expanded. This T-cell subset possesses conserved amino-acid sequences in complementarity-determining region 3 of the T-cell receptor and, via the perforin pathway, exerts a myotoxic effect on muscle fibers that express major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules. In all inflammatory myopathies, molecules associated with T-cell transmigration and cytokine signaling, as well as chemokines and their receptors, are strongly expressed by endothelial and inflammatory cells. Early in the pathogenesis of polymyositis and inclusion-body myositis, expression of MHC class I molecules on muscle fibers is upregulated, even in the absence of autoinvasive CD8 + T cells. Emerging data indicate that such continuous upregulation of the expression of MHC class I molecules on muscle fibers leads to an endoplasmic reticulum stress response, intracellular accumulation of misfolded glycoproteins, and activation of nuclear factor κB pathways, which can further stimulate formation of MHC class I-CD8 complexes, resulting in a self-sustaining inflammatory response. Advances in our understanding of the signaling pathways involved in the pathogenesis of these inflammatory myopathies are expected to result in the identification of novel therapeutic targets for these diseases.

dermatomyositis. Sporadic IBM is strongly associated with HLA-DRB1*0301 and HLA-DQB1*0201 alleles; further alleles of the 8.1 ancestral haplotype in the central and class II region of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) confer susceptibility to IBM. 7,8 The HLA-B8/DR3/DR52/DQ2 haplotype, seen in up to 65% of patients with IBM, is associated with earlier disease onset, suggesting that immunoregulatory genes are inherently connected with the manifestation of symptoms. 9

THE NATURE OF THE INFLAMMATORY RESPONSE Dermatomyositis: a complement-mediated microangiopathy

In dermatomyositis, inflammatory cells are predominantly located within the perivascular space or in the vicinity of the inter fascicular septa, rather than within the fascicles (bundles of muscle fibers). [1][2][3][4] The intra muscular capillaries show endothelial hyperplasia, with tubulo reticular profiles, vacuolization, and necrosis, leading to Figure 1 Sequence of immunopathologic changes in dermatomyositis. The disease probably begins with activation of complement and formation of activated C3 via the CLASSIC COMPLEMENT PATHWAY or ALTERNATIVE COMPLEMENT PATHWAY by putative antibodies against endothelial cells. Activated C3 leads to formation of C3b, C3b neoantigen, and the membranolytic attack complex, which is deposited in and around the endothelial cell wall of the endomysial capillaries. Deposition of the membranolytic attack complex leads to destruction and a reduced number of capillaries, with ischemia or microinfarcts most prominent in the periphery of the fascicle. Finally, a reduced number of capillaries with a dilated diameter remain, and perifascicular atrophy ensues. Not only the putative complement-fixing antibodies, but also B cells, CD4 + T cells, and macrophages migrate to the muscle. The migration of cells from the circulation is facilitated by vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 and intercellular adhesion molecule 1, the expression of which on the endothelial cells is upregulated by the released cytokines. T cells and macrophages bind to vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 and intercellular adhesion molecule 1 through their integrins, very late activation antigen 4 and leukocyte function-associated antigen 1, and transmigrate to the muscle through the endothelial cell wall.  12 and HUMAN myxovirus resistance  protein 13 ). Some of these are induced by interferon (IFN)-γ, or IFN-α and β, indicating a stressor effect and prominent local inflammatory response. The factors that activate complement and antigenic targets on the endothelium remain unknown. The lymphocytic infiltrates, prominent in the perimysial and perivascular regions, consist of B cells, CD4 + T cells, and plasma cytoid dendritic cells supporting the humoral-mediated immune response. 1-4,13 Complement activation upregulates the expression of cytokines, chemokines, and adhesion molecules, which, in turn, facilitates T-cell transmigration (Figure 1). 4 Gene-array studies have confirmed that three sequential processes exert a combined effect in the muscle microenvironment: 14 an inflammatory cascade, which is mediated by complement deposition in the microvasculature and facilitated by IFN-α and β, IFN-γ, and other cytokines and chemokines; an ischemic process, which results from the reduced capillary network; and a muscle-degenerative or muscle-regenerative cascade.

Polymyositis and inclusion-body myositis: a T-cell-mediated cytotoxic process

In polymyositis and IBM, the primary effector cells that mediate muscle-fiber injury are the CD8 + T cells that surround and invade MHC class I antigen-expressing, non-necrotic muscle fibers. 2,4 In IBM, in addition to T-cell-mediated cytotoxicity, there is vacuolar formation, accumulation of 15-21 nm tubulofilamentous inclusions, and cytoplasmic accumulations of 6-10 nm amyloidlike filaments that immuno react with various amyloid-protein-related antibodies. 15 In both polymyositis and IBM, muscle fibers express MHC class I and co-stimulatory molecules and, therefore, act as antigen-presenting cells. They form immuno logical synapses with the T-cell receptors (TCRs) of autoinvasive, clonally expanded CD8 + cytotoxic T cells that express the ligands for these co-stimulatory molecules (Figure 2). 4 Muscle fibers do not normally express MHC class I antigens; however, in polymyositis and IBM, MHC class I antigens are ubiquitously expressed, even on muscle fibers that are remote from the site of inflammation. 16 The up regulation of MHC class I antigen expression is specific for polymyositis and IBM, because in other chronic myopathies or dystrophies MHC class I antigens are absent, or only present in degenerating fibers. In addition, in dystrophies, the few endomysial T cells that are present are clonally diverse, and do not express activation or cytotoxicity markers. Cytokines might be the main inducers of MHC class I antigen expression, because in human myotubes proinflammatory cytokines upregulate MHC class I expression. 17,18 The observation that transgenic mice that overexpress MHC class I antigens develop endomysial inflammation 19 suggests that the upregulated MHC class I antigen expression seen in polymyositis and IBM might enhance inflammation and exert a stressor effect in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), as discussed later.

The autoinvasive CD8 + T cells are activatedthey express CD45RO, intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM) 1, MHC class I antigens, and inducible T-cell co-stimulator (ICOS). These T cells are cytotoxic, containing perforin granules 20,21 that are released towards the muscle fiber, inducing necrosis (Figure 2). 20 Although the muscle fibers express Fas antigen (CD95), and the T cells express Fas ligand (CD178), the perforin pathway, rather than the deathreceptor-mediated apoptosis pathway, is the implicated cytotoxic mechanism. 18,22,23 Antigen is recognized by αβT cells via complementarity-determining region (CDR) 3 of the TCRs expressed on the cell's surface. Each TCR is a heterodimer of an α-chain and a β-chain, generated by recombination of the VJ (variable region with a joining segment) and VDJ (variable region with diversity and joining segments) of the TCR genes. When T cells are selectively recruited following interaction with specific autoantigens, recombination of the TCR genes is restricted and the amino-acid sequence in the CDR3 region is conserved. 6 In polymyositis and IBM, but not dermatomyositis or dystrophies, only T cells expressing certain TCRs are recruited to the muscle from the circulation. [24][25][26] Furthermore, the autoinvasive (but not the perivascular) CD8 + T cells are clonally expanded, demonstrating restricted use of the Jβ genes and a conserved amino-acid sequence in the CDR3 region. These cells are cytotoxic and express perforin. 21,26 Sequential biopsy studies, even in different muscles, show that the clonally expanded, autoinvasive CD8 + cells persist for more than 2 years, probably driven by the same antigen or antigens. 27,28 MHC class I molecules present antigenic peptides to the TCRs of CD8 + T cells only in the presence of co-stimulatory molecules CD80 (that includes B7-1 and BB1), CD86 (B7-2), ICOS ligand (ICOSL), CD40, and their respective counter-receptors (CD28, cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4, ICOS, and CD40 ligand). In polymyositis and IBM, CD80, ICOSL, and CD40 are expressed on MHC class Iantigen-positive muscle fibers, and make contact with their respective ligands expressed on autoinvasive CD8 + T cells. 21,[29][30][31] Expression of CD80 and ICOSL on human myoblasts is induced by IFN-γ or TNF, and these molecules GLOSSARY PERFORIN A protein found in intracellular granules of cytotoxic T cells and natural-killer cells that causes lysis of target cells on contact www.nature.com/clinicalpractice/rheum might confer antigen-presenting cell function on muscle fibers. 18,29,31 Dendritic cells, which are the most potent antigen-presenting cells, might also participate in antigen presentation, because they are abundant within the endomysial infiltrates and express the chemokine-receptor complex CCL2-CCR6 (CC-chemokine ligand 2-CC-chemokine receptor 6). 32 Whether local production of cytokines and chemokines (e.g. IFN-γ, interleukin [IL]-1β, IL-17, and CCL2 or CCR6) facilitate the homing of these cells to the muscle for antigen presentation is unknown.

T-cell transmigration, cytokine signaling, and chemokine receptors

Cytokines (IL-1, IL-2, IL-5, IL-10, TNF, and transforming growth factor [TGF]-β) and chemokines (CCL2, CCL3, and the CXC-chemokine ligands [CXCL] 9 and 10) are variably overexpressed in polymyositis, dermatomyositis, and IBM and might contribute to co-stimulation, T-cell activation, and trans migration. [33][34][35] Cytokines induce the synthesis of TGF-β, CCL2, CCL3, IL-1β and ABPP in human myotubes, and might contribute to the persistence of the inflam matory response. 18,35 The CC-chemokine receptors CCR1−5, CCR2A, and CCR2B are upregulated on the endothelium and inflammatory cells, enhancing the local immune circuitry. Adhesion molecules and their ligands (e.g. vascular cell adhesion molecule 1, ICAM-1, leukocyte function-associated antigen 1, very late activation antigen 4, and metallo proteinases 33,36 ) are also overexpressed on the endothelium or activated T cells and facilitate the transmigration of lymphocytes towards muscle fibers (Figure 2).

VIRUSES AS POSSIBLE TRIGGERING FACTORS

Although coxsackieviruses, influenza, paramyxoviruses, the mumps virus, and cytomegaloviruses have been indirectly associated with myositis or implicated in breaking selftolerance, molecular techniques have failed to confirm their presence in muscle. 37 The best evidence for a viral connection is with retroviruses. Monkeys infected with the simian immuno deficiency virus and humans infected with HIV and human T-cell lymphotrophic virus 1 develop polymyositis or IBM. 38,39 Seven patients infected with HIV or human T-cell lympho trophic virus 1 developed IBM, and more such cases have been identified during the past 3 years, 40 indicating that the disease might be more common in patients who survive longer and, therefore, harbor the virus for several years. 40 In these patients, the virus does not persist or replicate within muscle fibers but is present only in occasional endomysial macrophages. 38,39 The disease is caused by clonally driven subpopulations of activated CD8 + T cells that expand in situ and invade MHC class I antigen-expressing muscle fibers, as seen in retrovirus-negative polymyositis or IBM. These cells are retrovirus-specific because their CDR3 region contains amino-acid residues specific for HLA-viral peptide, as determined by MHC tetramers. 41 The retroviral infection and immune recognition are, jointly, sufficient to trigger the inflammatory process. 41 

ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM STRESS ASSOCIATED WITH MHC CLASS I ANTIGEN

In polymyositis and IBM, MHC class I antigens are expressed in all muscle fibers regardless of whether they are invaded by T cells or contain vacuoles; 16 by contrast, the vacuolated fibers always express MHC class I antigens, but they are almost never surrounded by T cells. 5, 40 These observations indicate that two processes might occur in parallel: T-cell-mediated cytotoxicity, as described above; and a nonimmune process, involving ER stress due to upregulation of MHC class I antigen expression.

The assembly and folding of MHC class I molecules occurs in the ER and begins with the association of a heavy-chain glycoprotein with β2 microglobulin, which forms an unstable heterodimeric complex that matures only when bound to an antigenic peptide (Figure 3). Antigenic peptides are synthesized in the cytosol by immunoproteasomes that contain two MHC-encoded subunits-large multifunctional protease (LMP) 2 and LMP7-and are transported to the ER by transporter-associated protein (TAP). 42 A system of chaperone proteins (including calnexin, cal reticulin, the glucose-regulated proteins GRP94 and GRP78, and ERp72 [protein disulfideisomerase A4 precursor]) and two antigenprocessing proteins (TAP and tapasin) ensure the proper maturation of MHC class I antigens. 42 The ER maintains quality control by processing, folding, and exporting the MHC class I, which is loaded with antigen. 42,43 If the complex of glycoprotein, β2 microglobulin, calnexin, calreticulin, ERp57, TAP, and tapasin (collectively called the MHC class I loading complex) does not bind to suitable antigens, the heavy-chain glycoprotein GLOSSARY MHC TETRAMERS Four major histocompatibility complex (MHC) peptides linked together, which collectively bind or label T cells DALAKAS APRIL 2006 VOL 2 NO 4 www.nature.com/clinicalpractice/rheum is misfolded and removed from the ER to the cytosol for degradation. 42 In polymyositis and IBM, the muscle fibers are overloaded by MHC class I molecules, 43 which leads to an ER stress response and further protein misfolding, presumably because the antigenic peptides cannot undergo proper conformational change to bind to the MHC class I loading complexes. This hypothesis is supported by findings in muscle biopsies from patients with polymyositis and IBM: enhanced immunoproteasome activity, as evidenced by upregulation of LMP2 and LMP7, in conjunction with increased expression of MHC class I antigens; 44 enhanced MHC class I assembly activity, as evidenced by increased protein and messenger RNA (mRNA) expression of MHC class I antigens, GRP78, GRP94, ERp72, calnexin, and calreticulin; 43,45 misfolding of glycoproteins, as evidenced by the accumulation of amyloid-like molecules, in conjunction with ER-chaperone proteins and MHC class I molecules; 43,45 the cell-stress response, evidenced by activation of nuclear factor κB, a means by which the cells protect themselves from ER stress; 43 and upstream upregulation of alpha(B)-crystallin (a major stress protein) in the intact fibers 46 and its co-localization with MHC class I molecules (J Schmidt and MC Dalakas, unpublished data). Such stressor effects are seen not only in polymyositis and IBM, 43 but also in transgenic mice that express human MHC class I antigens, indicating that over expression of MHC class I antigens alone might be sufficient to induce ER stress. 43 Accordingly, polymyositis or IBM might be triggered by viral infection, leading to CLONAL EXPANSION of T cells and T-cell-mediated, MHC class I antigen-restricted cytotoxicity via the perforin pathway (Figure 4). The resultant ER stress response, which leads to nuclear factor κB activation and increased expression of inflammatory mediators, further stimulates the MHC class I-CD8 complex, inducing a self-sustaining inflammatory response. In IBM, there is a linear relationship between the mRNA levels of cytokines and chemokines and the mRNA levels of ABPP, microtubule-asso ciated protein tau, and ubiquitin, 47 supporting the previously proposed inter-relationship between proinflammatory and degenerative molecules. 5,6 Consistent with the above, is the observation that cytokines (e.g. IL-1β, TGF-β, and metalloproteinases) share common antigenic determinants and colocalize with MHC class I molecules and ABPP (J Schmidt and MC Dalakas, un published data). The expression of genes that result in the intracellular accumulation of ABPP, tau, apolipo protein-E, and oxidative-stress proteins is not unique to IBM, because these genes and their respective proteins are equally expressed in sporadic IBM, polymyositis, hereditary IBM, and other myo pathies, 48 indicating that The heavy chain of MHC class I molecules associates with the chaperone protein calnexin, binds β2 microglobulin, and incorporates into a series of chaperone proteins (e.g. ERp57, glucose-regulated proteins GRP78 and GRP94, calreticulin, transporter associated protein and tapasin) and forms the MHC class I peptide-loading complex. Antigenic peptides (derived from degraded proteins in the cytosol and synthesized by immunoproteasomes that contain two MHC class I-encoded subunits, large multifunctional protease-2 and large multifunctional protease-7) are transported to endoplasmic reticulum by transporter-associated protein and bind with the MHC class I peptide-loading complex. High-affinity antigenic peptides induce a conformational change in MHC class I molecules, promoting their release from the loading complex. In the muscle, the assembled MHC class I peptides traffic to the cell surface of the muscle fiber, which acts as an antigen-presenting cell, for recognition by CD8 + T cells. If suitable antigenic peptides are absent or cannot go through the proper conformational change to bind to MHC class I complex, the MHC class I peptide-loading complex becomes unstable, the heavy chain of MHC class I molecules are misfolded and removed from the endoplasmic reticulum to the cytosol for degradation. β2-m, β2 microglobulin; cln, calnexin; crt, calreticulin; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; ERp57, 58 kDa glucose-regulated protein; GRP, glucose-regulated protein; HC, heavy chain; LMP, large multifunctional protease; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; T (in circle), T cell; TAP, transporter-associated protein; TCR, T-cell receptor; tpn, tapasin.

www.nature.com/clinicalpractice/rheum the protein accumulation represents posttranslational events, probably secondary to the chronic cell-stress response.

BIOLOGICALLY RELEVANT GENES IN INFLAMMATORY MYOPATHIES

Genes for adhesion molecules, cytokines, MHC class I antigens, chemokines, and immunoglobulins are overexpressed in the muscles of patients with polymyositis and dermato myositis, and even more prominently in patients with IBM. 48,49 In dermatomyositis, among the most notably overexpressed genes are KAL1, which encodes anosmin-1, an adhesion molecule that is upregulated in vitro by TGF-β and might enhance fibrosis, 49 and MX1, encoding the myxovirus resistance 1 protein, which is induced by IFN-α/β. 13 There is higher expression of immuno globulin genes in IBM and polymyositis compared with dermato myositis, even though dermatomyositis is thought to be a humoral-mediated disease. 13,48,49 By contrast, IFN-inducible genes are more prominent in dermatomyositis. 14,49 Although the role of these genes is unclear, some of them have biological relevance, as demonstrated by microarray experiments performed on muscle biopsies before and after therapy. The released cytokines result in at least a threefold increase in expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules that cannot exit the endoplasmic reticulum because they cannot be conformationally assembled with antigenic peptide. As a result, there is an increase in the levels of MHC class I peptideloading complex and an endoplasmic reticulum stress response ensues, which leads to activation of nuclear factor κB and accumulation of misfolded MHC glycoproteins, including amyloid-related proteins. Activation of nuclear factor κB leads to the transcription of genes encoding inflammatory mediators, such as cytokines and chemokines, which further stimulate the MHC class I-CD8 complex, resulting in a self-sustaining inflammatory response. The amyloid-related misfolded proteins could also enhance the expression of cytokines, closing the loop between inflammatory and degeneration-associated molecules. ABPP, amyloid beta precursor protein; β2-m, β2 microglobulin; cln, calnexin; crt, calreticulin; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; ERp57, 58 kDa glucose-regulated protein; GRP, glucose-regulated protein; HC, heavy chain; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; NF-κB; nuclear factor κB; T (in circle), T cell; TAP, transporter associated protein; TCR, T-cell receptor; tpn, tapasin.

Muscles from dermatomyositis patients who

Acknowledgments This research was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the NIH, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

www.nature.com/clinicalpractice/rheum improved after intravenous immunoglobulin infusions showed alterations in the expression patterns of 2,206 genes; by contrast, 1,700 of the same genes remained unchanged in patients with sporadic IBM who did not improve. 49 Of the genes that were markedly downregulated after treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin in dermato myositis, but not sporadic IBM, were those encoding IL-22, anosmin-1, ICAM-1, complement C1q, and several structural proteins. Furthermore, the muscles from patients with improved dermatomyositis, but not sporadic IBM, showed upregulated expression of immuno globulin-related genes and chemokines CXCL9 and CXCL11, suggesting that these molecules are not only immunerelated, but might also participate in muscle remodeling and regeneration. 49 

FUTURE THERAPEUTIC STRATEGIES

Patients with dermatomyositis and poly myositis, but not IBM, respond (at least partially) to corticosteroids. Common immunotherapeutic agents (e.g. azathioprine, methotrexate, ciclosporin, mycophenolate mofetil, and cyclophosphamide) provide a steroid-sparing effect, but their overall efficacy is unimpressive. [1][2][3][4][5] Intravenous immunoglobulin infusions have shown dramatic, albeit un sustained, benefits in steroid-unresponsive cases. The treatment of IBM remains challenging; it resembles primary progressive multiple sclerosis, where immunoregulatory abnormalities co-exist with axonal degeneration. New biologic agents that target the main immunopathologic processes (e.g. T-cell activation, transmigration, and antigen recognition; Figures 1-3) could be promising. Such semi specific immunotherapies could be accomplished with monoclonal antibodies that affect T-cell regulatory pathways, such as anti-CD56 (alemtuzumab) or that affect co-stimulatory molecules (CD28 or cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4), ad hesion molecules (integrins, leukocyte functionasso ciated antigen 1, and ICAM-1), cytokines (TNF), or B cells (CD20). Toward this end, the results obtained with anti-T-lymphocyte antibodies in patients with IBM are encouraging. 50 A relevant study of alemtuzumab, which causes long-lasting T-cell depletion, is ongoing at the NIH. Other promising agents that are being tested, or considered, include the B-cell-depleting antibody rituximab (for dermato myositis and polymyositis), rapamycin, which acts via a calcineurin-independent pathway to prevent the translation of mRNAs for key cytokines, and the anti-integrin antibody natalizumab (when it is back on the market), which blocks the transmigration of T cells across the endothelium.

KEY POINTS

■

Dermatomyositis is a complement-mediated microangiopathy, which leads to destruction of endomysial capillaries

■

In polymyositis and inclusion-body myositis (IBM), the muscle fibers overexpress major histocompatibility complex class I molecules and autoinvasive T cells are clonally expanded

■

In polymyositis and IBM, the T cells form immunologic synapses with the muscle fibers; however, the antigen or antigens they recognize are still unknown

■

In IBM, an autoimmune and a degenerative process occur in parallel; the continuous upregulation of major histocompatibility complex class I molecules on muscle fibers is a major culprit in inducing an endoplasmic reticulum stress response and accumulation of misfolded glycoproteins within the muscle fibers

■

New immunomodulating agents against signaling pathways involved in T-cell or B-cell activation offer promise for future therapies 

Competing interests

The author declared he has no competing interests.

Figure 22Figure2Immunopathogenesis of polymyositis and inclusion-body myositis. Binding of leukocyte function-associated antigen 1 expressed by CD8 + T cells and intercellular adhesion molecule 1 expressed on the muscle fibers, initiates the formation of an immunological synapse between the muscle fiber and the antigen-receiving T-cell receptor of the CD8 + T cells. Stimulation is supported and enhanced by the engagement of CD80, inducible T-cell co-stimulator (ICOS), CD40, and additional co-stimulatory molecules with their ligands CD28, cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4, ICOS ligand and CD40 ligand. Metalloproteinases facilitate the migration of T cells and their attachment to the muscle surface. Muscle-fiber necrosis occurs via the perforin granules released by the autoaggressive T cells. A direct myocytotoxic effect exerted by the released interferon-γ, interleukin-1, or tumor necrosis factor, might also have a role. Death of the muscle fiber is mediated by a form of necrosis rather than apoptosis, presumably because of the counterbalancing effect or protection by the antiapoptotic molecules B-cell leukemia/lymphoma 2, human inhibitor of apoptosis-like protein and FLICE (Fas-associated death domain-like interleukin-1 converting enzyme)-inhibitory protein, which are upregulated in the muscles of patients with polymyositis and inclusion-body myositis. Fas is also expressed, but it does not mediate apoptosis in the muscle. The upregulated expression of neural cell adhesion molecule 1 on regenerating muscle fibers might enhance regeneration. The cell transmigration and activation of adhesion molecules on the endothelial cell wall occurs by a similar process to that seen in dermatomyositis. CD40L, CD40 ligand; CTLA4, cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4; IFN-γ, interferon-γ; IL-1, interleukin-1; ICAM-1, intercellular adhesion molecule 1; ICOS, inducible T-cell co-stimulator; ICOSL, inducible T-cell co-stimulator ligand; LFA-1, leukocyte functionassociated antigen 1; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase; T (in circle), T cell; TCR, T-cell receptor; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; VCAM-1, vascular cell adhesion molecule 1; VLA-4, very late activation antigen 4.

Figure 33Figure 3Assembly of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I peptide complexes in the endoplasmic reticulum of the muscle fiber. The heavy chain of MHC class I molecules associates with the chaperone protein calnexin, binds β2 microglobulin, and incorporates into a series of chaperone proteins (e.g. ERp57, glucose-regulated proteins GRP78 and GRP94, calreticulin, transporter associated protein and tapasin) and forms the MHC class I peptide-loading complex. Antigenic peptides (derived from degraded proteins in the cytosol and synthesized by immunoproteasomes that contain two MHC class I-encoded subunits, large multifunctional protease-2 and large multifunctional protease-7) are transported to endoplasmic reticulum by transporter-associated protein and bind with the MHC class I peptide-loading complex. High-affinity antigenic peptides induce a conformational change in MHC class I molecules, promoting their release from the loading complex. In the muscle, the assembled MHC class I peptides traffic to the cell surface of the muscle fiber, which acts as an antigen-presenting cell, for recognition by CD8 + T cells. If suitable antigenic peptides are absent or cannot go through the proper conformational change to bind to MHC class I complex, the MHC class I peptide-loading complex becomes unstable, the heavy chain of MHC class I molecules are misfolded and removed from the endoplasmic reticulum to the cytosol for degradation. β2-m, β2 microglobulin; cln, calnexin; crt, calreticulin; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; ERp57, 58 kDa glucose-regulated protein; GRP, glucose-regulated protein; HC, heavy chain; LMP, large multifunctional protease; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; T (in circle), T cell; TAP, transporter-associated protein; TCR, T-cell receptor; tpn, tapasin.

Figure 44Figure 4Proposed mechanisms for the pathogenesis of polymyositis and inclusion-body myositis. Viral triggers lead to clonal expansion of CD8 + T cells and T-cell-mediated cytotoxicity via the perforin pathway. The released cytokines result in at least a threefold increase in expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules that cannot exit the endoplasmic reticulum because they cannot be conformationally assembled with antigenic peptide. As a result, there is an increase in the levels of MHC class I peptide-

