Parkin and its association with α-synuclein and AβPP in inclusion-body myositis and AβPP-overexpressing cultured human muscle fibers

Parkin, an E3-ubiquitin ligase in the ubiquitin-proteasome system, facilitates degradation of α-synuclein and other proteins. Since ubiquitinated multiprotein-aggregates containing amyloid-β (Aβ), α-synuclein, and other proteins, are characteristic of sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM) muscle fibers, we asked whether parkin might have a role in s-IBM pathogenesis. We studied the association of parkin with αsynuclein and Aβ-precursor protein (AβPP) in s-IBM muscle biopsies and in our IBM model based on overexpression of AβPP into cultured human muscle fibers. We report the following in s-IBM muscle fibers: a) parkin was increased 2.7 fold and accumulated in aggregates also containing Aβ and α-synuclein; b) α-synuclein was increased 6.3 fold; c) parkin physically associated with α-synuclein and AβPP; d) α-synuclein and AβPP were ubiquitinated. In the IBM model: a) parkin was increased 2.7 fold, b) it associated with α-synuclein and AβPP.

Conclusion:

1. This is the first demonstration that in a human muscle disease α-synuclein associates with parkin, and might be ubiquitinated by it. 2. The small increase of parkin relative to the much larger increase of α-synuclein might be insufficient to secure complete ubiquitination and consequent degradation of α-syn.

AβPP might be a novel substrate of parkin.

intriguing aspect of the s-IBM muscle-fiber phenotype is its similarity to Alzheimer-disease brain, including accumulations of ubiquitinated multiprotein-aggregates containing proteins in alternate conformation (indicated by congophilic amyloid), including amyloid-β (Aβ), and phosphorylated tau in the form of paired helical filaments (2,3). In s-IBM muscle fibers there is also evidence of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and the unfolded protein response (4, 5). Overexpression of Aβ precursor protein (AβPP) into mature cultured human muscle fibers induces in them several aspects of the IBM phenotype (6-8), strongly suggesting that AβPP, and its toxic proteolytic product Aβ, play an upstream role in the s-IBM pathogenic cascade. Recently demonstrated were inhibition of 26S proteasome activity and features of aggresomes, which were modeled in mature cultured human muscle fibers by overexpression of AβPP (9). Oxidative and nitricoxide-induced stress, and mitochondrial abnormalities, are also aspects of the s-IBM muscle fiber pathology (2,3). α-synuclein (α-syn), which in several cell-types was reported to induce pronounced toxicity -including mitochondrial abnormalities, proteasome inhibition, and oxidative stress (10-13) -was shown morphologically to be accumulated in s-IBM fibers ( 14). Accordingly, a putative toxicity of α-syn, in addition to the demonstrated cytotoxicity of Aβ (6-9), may contribute to muscle-fiber degeneration in s-IBM. Such toxicity might not be related to the α-syn and Aβ in the insoluble aggregates, but rather to an intracellular toxicity of their soluble oligomers and protofibrils (3).

Introduction

s-IBM is the most common muscle disease of persons age 50 years and older. It is of unknown etiology and pathogenesis, and lacks definitive treatment (recently reviewed in 1). Its inexorably progressive course leads to severe disability (1). An Parkin is an E3-ubiquitin ligase, which in collaboration with an E2-ubiquitin conjugating enzyme, UbcH7, ubiquitinates a subset of proteins enabling their degradation by the 26S proteasome (15)(16)(17). Parkin contains a NH 2 -terminal ubiquitin-like (UBL) domain and a COOH-terminal RING box separated by a linker region (15)(16)(17). The RING box recruits an E2-conjugating enzyme, UbcH7 or UbcH8 (15)(16)(17).

An O-glycosylated form of α-syn, termed "α Sp22", is ubiqitinated by parkin in vitro and in human brain (18). In brains of sporadic Parkinson disease patients, parkin and α-syn accumulate in Lewy Bodies (LB) (17,19), which have features of aggresomes (20). Parkin, in addition to enhancing proteasome function through ubiquitination of proteins, also protects cells against toxicity induced by α-syn, endoplasmic reticulum stress, and other stresses (21)(22)(23)(24). Mutations of parkin that disrupt its E3-ligase activity are associated with autosomalrecessive, early-onset Parkinson disease (15)(16)(17).

To investigate whether parkin might play a role in s-IBM pathogenesis, we studied it in s-IBM muscle fibers by light-and electron-microscopic immunocytochemistry and by immunoblots, and evaluated its binding partners by combined immunoprecipitation-immunoblotting. To explore possible pathogenic mechanisms involving parkin regulation, we utilized our well-characterized model of IBM based on AβPP-overexpression into cultured normal human muscle fibers (6)(7)(8)(9).

Material and Methods

Muscle biopsies

Immunocytochemical studies were performed on 10-μm transverse sections of fresh-frozen diagnostic muscle biopsies obtained, with informed consent, from 17 s-IBM and 28 control patients, including 3 dermatomyositis, 4 polymyositis, 2 vacuolated non-specific myopathy, 3 amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 4 peripheral neuropathy and 12 normal muscle. All diagnoses were based on our routinely-performed extensive clinical and laboratory studies.

Light-microscopic immunocytochemistry. This was performed as described (4, 5, 9, 14) using 3 well-characterized anti-parkin antibodies: 1) rabbit polyclonal antibody against parkin corresponding to the residues surrounding amino acid 400 of human parkin (Cell Signaling Technology, Inc. Cummings Center, Beverly, MA), diluted 1:100;

2) goat polyclonal antibody against N-terminus residues 83-97 of human parkin, diluted 1:100; and 3) rabbit polyclonal antibody against amino acids 295-311 of human parkin, diluted 1:100 ("2" and "3" from Chemicon, Temecula, CA). All 3 antibodies have been extensively used in other studies (25,26). Double-immunofluorescence utilized an anti-parkin antibody combined with either: 1) mouse monoclonal antibody clone LB 509 against α-syn (Zymed Laboratories, San Francisco, CA USA), diluted 1:100 (14); 2) mouse monoclonal antibody against recombinant α-syn (Chemicon, Temecula, CA USA) diluted 1:100 (rabbit polyclonal antibody against α-syn amino acid residue 111-131 [Chemicon] was also used for immunocytochemical studies and gave the same results); 3) mouse monoclonal antibody against UbcH7 generated against human UbcH7 amino acids 15-133, (BD Transduction Laboratories, San Jose, CA USA), diluted 1:100 (18); 4) mouse monoclonal antibody against ubiquitin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA USA), diluted 1:100; 5) mouse monoclonal antibody S5a to the 19S regulator non-ATPase subunit Rpn 10 (S5a) (Affinity Research Products Ltd, UK), diluted 1:500 (9); 6) mouse monoclonal antibody 6E10 (Signet, Dedham, MA, USA), diluted 1:100, which morphologically recognizes Aβ in both AD brain (27) and s-IBM muscle (14), and on immunoblots it recognizes the Aβ region within the parent AβPP molecule (27). Aggresomes were defined by a well-characterized mouse monoclonal antibody against γ-tubulin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) diluted 1:50 (9).

To block non-specific binding of an antibody to Fc receptors, sections were preincubated with normal goat or rabbit serum diluted 1:10 (4,5,9,14). Controls for staining specificity were omission of the primary antibody, or its replacement with non-immune sera or irrelevant antibody.

Immuno-electronmicroscopy. Gold immunoelectronmicroscopy was performed on 10 μm unfixed frozen sections adhered to the bottom of 35-mm Petri dishes, as described (4,5,9,14).

For double immunolocalization, sections were incubated concurrently in a rabbit polyclonal antibody against parkin, combined with either the mouse monoclonal antibody 6E10 against Aβ or mouse monoclonal antibody against α-syn, followed by incubation in two different species-specific secondary antibodies (4,5,9,14).

Immunoblots. Immunoblots were performed on 7 s-IBM and 7 control muscle biopsies, as recently detailed (4,5,9,28). In brief, 10 μg of protein were loaded onto 10% NuPAGE gels (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY), electrophoresed, transferred to nitrocellulose membranes, and immunoprobed with antibodies against either: a) parkin, diluted 1:500; b) α-syn, diluted 1:1000; or c) UbcH7, diluted 1:250. (Three different anti-parkin antibodies specified above gave the same results, and two different anti-α-syn antibodies, one monoclonal and one polyclonal, both from Chemicon, gave the same results). The blots were developed using the enhanced chemiluminescence system. Protein loading was evaluated by actin bands visualized with a mouse monoclonal anti-actin antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), diluted 1:2000. Quantification of immunoreactivity was performed by densitometric analysis using NIH Image J 1.310 and the Kodak Gel Logic 440 imaging system (Eastman Kodak Company, Rochester, NY USA). Intensity of the band of interest was calculated in relation to intensity of the actin band. Omission of a primary antibody was the control for reaction specificity.

Combined immunoprecipitation-immunoblot procedure. To evaluate in s-IBM muscle fibers whether a) parkin physically associates with αsyn, UbcH7, AβPP, and 19S proteasome, and b) α-syn and AβPP are ubiquitinated, a combined immunoprecipitation-immunoblot technique was performed, as we have detailed (4,9,28). In brief, 100 μg of total muscle protein from s-IBM and control muscle biopsies were individually immunoprecipitated in precipitation buffer containing either 5 μg of anti-parkin, anti-α-synuclein or 6E10 antibodies, as described (4,9,28). The immunoprecipitates were electrophoresed and immunoblotted with an antibody against the protein of interest, followed by a specific secondary antibody. To confirm specificity of the immunoprecipitation reaction, a) a primary antibody was omitted in the immunoprecipitation mixture, or b) the primary antibodies were omitted in the immunoblots, and the blots were incubated only in the secondary antibody (4,9,28).

O-deglycosylation of α-syn. The procedure was as previously reported for human brain (18). In brief, following immunoprecipitation with parkin antibody, the immunoprecipitates were incubated in two specific O-deglycosylating enzymes together, sialidase A and O-glycosidase, or in N-glycosidase, as recommended by the supplier (ProZyme Inc., San Leandro, CA USA) (18). Subsequently, the immunoprecipitates were electrophoresed and immunoblotted with an antibody against α-syn.

Statistical Analysis. In all experiments these analyses were performed using Student t-test. Significance level was set at p< 0.05. Data are reported as means ± SEM for all groups.

Cultured human muscle fibers

Cultures were established from satellite cells of archived portions of diagnostic muscle biopsies from patients who, after all tests were performed, were considered free of muscle disease (29). In six experimental culture sets, each established from a different muscle biopsy, a 3 Kb 751 AβPP-cDNA was transferred into three-week-old cultured human muscle fibers, using a replicationdeficient adenovirus (RDAV) vector at 0.3x10 8 pfu/ml culture medium, as detailed (6)(7)(8)(9). Three days after the transfer, control and AβPP-overerexpressing cultures were treated with 1μM epoxomicin (Biomol Research Laboratories, Plymouth Meeting, PA), an irreversible proteasome inhibitor (30). 24 hours later they were processed as described (6)(7)(8)9) for light-microscopic immunocytochemistry and immunoblots of parkin. To determine whether in this culture system parkin physically associates with α-syn, AβPP and 19S proteasome, we performed immunoprecipitationimmunoblot studies as described above for s-IBM biopsied muscle.

Results

s-IBM and control muscle biopsies

Light-microscopic immunocytochemistry. In all s-IBM biopsies, on a given cross-section, 60-70% of the vacuolated muscle fibers and approximately 15% of the non-vacuolated ones contained, mainly in their non-vacuolated cytoplasm, various-sized rounded or slightly elongated parkin-immunoreactive (IR) aggregates (Fig. 1  A, C, E, G, K). Parkin-IR aggregates had features of aggresomes because 70 to 80% of them were associated with γ-tubulin (Fig. 1 K,L). (However, as shown previously (9), in contrast to "classical" aggresomes originally described in mononucleated cells (31), the aggresomes occurring in the normally-multinucleated muscle fibers of s-IBM and in our IBM model were not located perinuclearly). The parkin-IR aggregates also contained immunoreactive α-syn, UbcH7, Aβ and 19S proteasome (Fig. 1B, D, F, H). α-syn in the aggregates co-immunolocalized with ubiquitin (Fig. 1 I, J). When the primary antibody was omitted or replaced by either a non-immune serum or an irrelevant antibody, the described immunoreactions were not evident. None of the control, 16 diseased or 12 normal, biopsies had muscle fibers containing aggregates immunoreactive with antibodies against parkin, α-syn, Aβ, UbcH7, Ub, or 19S proteasome.

Electronmicroscopic-immunocytochemistry. By double-label gold immuno-electronmicroscopy of s-IBM muscle fibers, both parkin and α-syn, and parkin and Aβ, were associated together with the 6-10 nm amyloid-like fibrils, and with floccular and amorphous material (Fig. 2 A-D).

Immunoblots. In homogenates of both s-IBM and normal muscle biopsies, parkin migrated as 22 and 52 kDa bands (Fig. 3 A). In 7 s-IBM biopsies, as compared to 7 control muscle biopsies, densitometry revealed that the 22kDa isoform of parkin was increased 2.7 times (p<0.005), while the 52 kDa form of parkin was increased 1.8 times (p< 0.01) (Fig. 3B). UbcH7 migrated as a 16kDa band, as previously described for other cells (18) (Fig. 3C), and in s-IBM it was increased 2 fold (p< 0.05) (Fig. 3D). In both s-IBM and control muscle biopsies, α-syn migrated mainly as two major bands, 22 and 16 kDa. However, there were also weaker bands between 32-90 kDa, some of which appeared to be slightly stronger in s-IBM muscle fibers; those may represent ubiquitinated forms of α-syn (see below). In 7 s-IBM muscle biopsies, densitometry revealed that the 22kDa α-syn band was increased 6.3-fold (p< 0.001) as compared to 7 control muscle biopsies, while the 16kDa band was not changed (Fig. 3 E, F). In each experiment, omission of primary antibody resulted in no bands being detected (Fig. 3 A, C, E).

Combined immunoprecipitation-immunoblot experiments.

Because in s-IBM muscle fibers parkin by immunofluorescence co-localized with Aβ, α-syn, UbcH7 and 19S proteasome, we sought by combined immunoprecipitation-immunoblot experiments whether there is a physical association of parkin with those proteins. Immunoprecipitation with an antibody against parkin followed by immunoblotting with antibodies against a puta-  have any effect (Fig. 4 G). Thus, also in human muscle parkin associates with the αSp22 form of α-syn.

Since parkin associates with AβPP and α-syn in s-IBM muscle fibers, we evaluated whether AβPP and α-syn are ubiquitinated by immunoprecipitation with an antibody against either α-syn or AβPP/Aβ, followed by immunoblotting with an antibody against ubiquitin. For α-syn, this revealed ubiquitinated bands of various intensity at 32, 40, 62, 70 and 90 kDa (Fig. 4 E), some of which were also present in α-syn immunoblots (see Fig. 3E). For AβPP, there were ubiquitinated bands at 150 and 180 kDa. A 130 kDa band of AβPP that associates with parkin was not present and, therefore, probably was not ubiquitinated (Fig. 4 F,1), whereas a 130 kDa band was clearly present when the same immunoprecipitate was immunoprobed with the antibody against AβPP (Fig. 4 F,2). Thus, in s-IBM muscle fibers at least some molecules of both α-syn and AβPP are ubiquitinated, and parkin seems to associate only with their non-ubiquitinated forms, 22 kDa O-glycosylated form of αsyn and 130 kDa for AβPP.

Cultured muscle fibers

To explore possible mechanisms involved in parkin abnormalities in s-IBM, we studied parkin by immunocytochemistry, immunoblots and immunoprecipitation in: a) our experimentally-induced IBM model, based on overexpression of AβPP into cultured human muscle fibers; b) proteasome-inhibited control and AβPP-overexpressing cultured human muscle fibers; and c) control untreated muscle cultures.

In the non-AβPP-overexpressing non-proteasome-inhibited control cultures, parkin was very weakly and diffusely immunoreactive, whereas in the AβPP-overexpressing cultures its immunoreactivity was much stronger and occasionally aggregated (Fig. 5 A,B). Epoxomicin treatment induced, in the cytoplasm of 60-80% of the AβPP-overexpressing cultured muscle fibers (Fig. 5 C), numerous well-defined, various-sized parkin-IR aggregates, which by double-label immunofluorescence were immunoreactive for γ-tubulin (Fig. 5D,  E), suggesting that they are aggresomes (9). Those aggregates also contained α-syn and Aβ immunoreactivity (Fig. 5 F-I). 15-20% of the epoxomicintreated non-AβPP-overexpressing cultured muscle tively-associated protein revealed the following: a) antibody against α-syn disclosed a band at 22 kDa corresponding to α-syn, but no band at 16 kDa; b) mouse monoclonal antibody 6E10 disclosed a 130 kDa band corresponding to AβPP; c) antibody against UbcH7 disclosed a 16 kDa band corresponding to UbcH7; d) antibody against 19S proteasome subunit revealed a 45 kDa band corresponding to proteasome (Fig. 4 A-D). To study whether in human muscle fibers, a 22kDa form of α-syn is O-glycosylated, we used specific O-deglycosylating enzymes sialidase A together with O-glycosidase, as described (18). We found, similarly to what was reported for human brain (18), that after O-deglycosylation the 22 kDa band had shifted to the 16 kDa position (Fig. 4G), indicating that the 22k Da form of α-syn is O-glycosylated. The N-deglycosylating enzyme did not  . Immunoprecipitations (IP) of control and s-IBM biopsies with antibody against parkin, followed by immunoblotting (IB) with an antibody against α-syn, show in both biopsies a 22kDa band of α-syn. Omission of the anti-parkin antibody from the immunoprecipitation reaction (*) or omission of the primary α-syn antibody from the immunoblots (#), resulted in no bands being present. (B,C,D) immunoprecipitations (IP) of s-IBM muscle biopsies with antibody against parkin, followed by immunoblotting (IB) with (B) antibody against UbcH7, (C) 6E10 against AβPP/Aβ, and (D) antibody s5a against 19S proteasome subunit -these show bands corresponding to molecular weights of the respective proteins. * = omission of anti-parkin antibody from the immunoprecipitation reactions; # = omission of the primary antibodies from the immunoblotting. Both * and # were always negative. E and F illustrate ubiquitinated bands of α-syn and AβPP in s-IBM muscle fibers, achieved after immunoprecipitation with antibody against α-syn (E) or 6E10 against AβPP/Aβ (F), followed by immunoblotting with antibody against ubiquitin (E, and F1). In (E) there are several α-syn ubiquitinated bands at 32, 40, 62, 70 and 90 kDa, while control* shows only an IgG band, and control # is negative. In (F1) there are two AβPP ubiquitinated bands at 150 and 180 kDa, while in (F2), in which the same immunoprecipitate as in (F1) was immunoprobed with 6E10 antibody against AβPP/Aβ there is a strong 130kDa band, and weaker 150 and 180 kDa bands present (details in the text); controls * (no primary antibody in the immunoprecipitation solution), and # (no primary antibody in the immunoblotting) do not show any bands. G illustrates deglycosylation experiments with a normal human muscle biopsy homogenate, which was immunoprecipitated with antibody against parkin, deglycosylated, electrophoresed, and immunoblotted with an antibody against α-syn. After deglycosylation with O-glycosidase and sialidase A, but not with N-glycosidase, the 22 kDa band of α-syn shifted to 16kDa position, indicating that the 22kDa band in human muscle is O-glycosylated.

Figure 5.

Single immunofluorescence of parkin in control (A) and AβPP-overexpressing (B) cultured human muscle fibers show much stronger, diffuse parkin immunoreactivity due to the AβPP overexpression. In the AβPPoverexpressing fibers, epoxomicin treatment induced strongly parkin-immunoreactive aggregates (C) -by doublelabel immunofluorescence, the parkin aggregates colocalized with γ-tubulin (D,E), indicating they have features of aggresomes, and with α-syn (F,G) and Aβ (H,I). All x1200.

fiber had weakly-parkin-IR aggregates, which contained weak α-syn immunoreactivity, but no Aβ (not shown).

As in human muscle biopsies, immunoblots of control cultured human muscle fibers revealed 2 bands of parkin, migrating at 22 and 52 kDa (Fig. 6A). Compared to control cultures, AβPP-overexpression increased the 22 kDa isoform of parkin 2.7-fold (p<0.02); epoxomicin treatment increased this isoform 1.6-fold (p< 0.002) in control muscle fibers and 4-fold (p<0.02) in AβPP-overexpressing cultured fibers (Fig. 6B). The 52 kDa band was not influenced by the AβPP-overexpression or epoxomicin treatment. As in s-IBM biopsied muscle fibers, in AβPPoverexpressing cultured fibers, immunoprecitationimmunoblot experiments showed parkin physically associated with Aβ, α-syn and 19S proteasome (Fig. 6 C-D).

Discussion

In this study, we demonstrated, for the first time that within s-IBM muscle fibers: 1) parkin is abnormally accumulated in the aggresome-like structures, where it immuno-colocalizes with α-syn, Aβ, 19S proteasome, UbcH7, and γ-tubulin; 2) there is a spatial association of parkin with α-syn and Aβ by immuno-electronmicroscopy; 3) the 22k Da isoform of parkin was more increased than the 52 kDa form; 4) AβPP is a novel binding partner of parkin. In cultured human muscle fibers, parkin is increased by AβPP overexpression and by proteasome inhibition. Similarly to what has been reported in other cells (18,32), both in s-IBM and in cultured muscle fibers parkin was physically associated with: a) the 22kDa O-glycosylated α-syn, and b) the 19S proteasome. Since in s-IBM muscle fibers both α-syn and AβPP are ubiquitinated we suggest that parkin may participate in their ubiquitination. Support of this proposed role of parkin is our demonstration of the physical association of parkin with its collaborating E2-ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme UcbH7, and the similar magnitude of their increases.

Our studies showed that 22 kDa isoform of parkin is more strongly expressed than its 52kDa isoform in biopsied control and s-IBM adult muscle fibers, and in cultured human muscle fibers. Previously, the 22 kDa isoform of parkin was found weakly expressed in adult mouse tissues Significance was set at p<0.05. The analysis shows that the 22kDa parkin band is greatly increased in the AβPPoverexpressing (ABPP+) cultured muscle fibers, and that epoxomicin significantly increased 22kDa parkin in both control and the AβPP+ fibers. (C-E) Immunoprecipitations (IP) of control (C), and of control and AβPP+ cultured muscle fibers (D,E) using antibody against parkin followed by immunoblotting (IB) with antibody against α-syn (C), 6E10 against AβPP/Aβ (D), and s5a against Rpn10 19S proteasome (E). These revealed bands corresponding to the respective proteins (details in the text), indicating physical association of parkin with each of them. * indicates negative controls as in Fig. 4. (33), but skeletal muscle was not studied. Others have recently reported that parkin is increased immunocytochemically in some s-IBM muscle fibers (34), but its quantification, isoform characterization by immunoblots, and association with other proteins were not studied.

We previously showed immunocytochemically that α-syn is accumulated in s-IBM muscle fibers (14), but its isoform characteristics were not studied by immunoblots. In our present study of normal and s-IBM human muscle fibers, the 22 kDa form of αsyn, which is O-glycosylated, is more expressed than its native 16 kDa form. The 22 kDa form, and not the native 16 kDa form, was shown by others to be a target of ubiquitination by parkin (18). The preferential increase of the 22 kDa O-glycosylated form of α-syn in s-IBM muscle fibers might be due to proteasome inhibition, which has been previously demonstrated in s-IBM fibers (9). In some systems, α-syn is degraded by both the 26S proteasome and by lysosomal autophagy (35). Whether in s-IBM muscle fibers, α-syn is also degraded by the lysosomal authophagy, and whether a possible insufficiency of this system also contributes to our currently-demonstrated significant increase of α-syn, are not yet known.

α-syn has been implicated in the pathogenesis of several neurodegenerative diseases (10,17,36), and its overexpression has been associated with oxidative stress, impairment of proteasomal function, and mitochondrial, and other abnormalities (10,12,13,36,37).

In various parkin-overexpressing cell-lines and transgenic models, wild-type parkin, but not its disease-associated mutants, can protect against α-syninduced toxicity, oxidative stress, and endoplasmic reticulum stress in various cell-types (15,17,(22)(23)(24).

Reportedly, parkin-null mutant Drosophila have flight muscle degeneration and abnormal mitochondria (38), and parkin protects cultured mouse muscle from mitochondrial toxins and Aβ accumulation (34).

Our studies have demonstrated parkin abnormalities in a myodegenerative human muscle disease, IBM, and an IBM human experimental culture model. They show for the first time that parkin associates with AβPP, in addition to the αSp22 form of α-syn, both in biopsied s-IBM muscle fibers and in our IBM culture model. Even though in s-IBM muscle fibers α-syn and AβPP are binding partners of parkin and are ubiquitinated, our studies suggest, but do not provide direct evidence, that: a) parkin participates in their ubiquitination, and b) their ubiquitination is not sufficient for their proper degradation by proteasome. In contrast to α-syn data, there has been only one previous report (to our knowledge) regarding ubiquitination of AβPP in cultured cells (39).

Our studies demonstrate that in normal cultured human muscle fibers parkin is increased by induced overexpression of AβPP and experimental proteasome inhibition, suggesting the possibility that increase of parkin within s-IBM biopsied muscle fibers could be due to one or both of these mechanisms. We propose that parkin might be increased as the result of a muscle cell's attempt to protect itself against AβPP/Aβ toxicity, a putative α-syn toxicity, and various other stresses, including oxidative and ER stress, and proteasome inhibition. We further propose that the 2.7-fold increase of parkin in s-IBM muscle fibers is not sufficient to overcome a 6-fold increase of α-syn, or to protect against other continuing stresses, since s-IBM is a relentlessly progressive disease. In s-IBM muscle fibers, it is possible that parkin sequestration in the aggregates further reduces its cytoprotective availability. Moreover, nitric-oxide induced stress and oxidative stress, both of which exist in s-IBM fibers (2, 3) and have been shown by others to inactivate parkin (40,41), might reduce activity of parkin in s-IBM muscle fibers. Another possibility is that in s-IBM fibers a protective activity of parkin might also be diminished by yet-unknown muscle-fiber-specific mechanisms, in principle analogously to the recently demonstrated inhibition of neuronal parkin by dopamine (42).

Conclusion

As yet there is no report that mutations in either α-syn or parkin genes, or variants in their promoter regions, predispose to s-IBM. However, our studies demonstrated that s-IBM is the first muscle disease in which parkin associates with α-syn, and we suggest that insufficiency of parkin or loss of its activity may play an important pathogenic role, similarly to what is proposed in Parkinson disease and perhaps other neurodegenerative disorders. If indeed α-syn is toxic to muscle fibers as it is to other celltypes, parkin might be playing a protective role, in addition to other known cytoprotective functions of parkin. If so, manipulations toward increasing parkin in s-IBM muscle might be clinically beneficial. In contrast to most of the previous studies of parkin that utilized various parkin-overexpressing cells, our studies were performed on biopsied and cultured human muscle fibers, the cell-type clinically affected by s-IBM, enhancing their likelihood of direct clinical relevance.

Acknowledgements

Maggie Barburyan provided excellent technical assistance in electronmicroscopy. OP is on leave from Department of Pathology and Animal Health, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy. SW is on leave from the Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland.

Supported by grants (to VA) from the National Institutes of Health (AG16768 Merit Award), the Muscular Dystrophy Association, The Myositis Association, and the Helen Lewis Research Fund.

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. In s-IBM muscle fibers double-label immunofluorescence of parkin with: α-synuclein (α-syn) (A, B); UbcH7 (C,D); amyloid-β (Aβ) (E,F); and Rpn10 19S proteasome subunit (19S prot) (G,H). Those pairs demonstrate that parkin-immunoreactive aggregates also contain α-syn, UbcH7, Aβ and 19S proteasome subunit. Double-label immunofluorescence of parkin with Á-tubulin (K,L) shows colocalization, indicating that parkin immunoreactivity is in aggresome-like structures. I and J demonstrate that α-syn immunoreactive-aggregates are also immunoreactive for ubiquitin (Ub). All x1100.

Figure 2 .2Figure 2. Double-label gold-immuno-electronmicroscopy in s-IBM. (A,B) parkin (park) (10 nm gold particles) and αsyn (syn) (5nm gold particles) are both associated with 6-10nm amyloid-like fibrils (A), and with amorphous-floccular material (B). (C,D) parkin (10nm gold particles) and Aβ (5nm gold particles) are associated with 6-10 nm amyloidlike fibrils (C) and amorphous-floccular material (D). A-D x 40,000.

Figure 3 .3Figure 3. Immunoblots of parkin (A), UbcH7 (C), and αsyn (E), in muscle homogenates of normal-control (C) and s-IBM muscle biopsies, show stronger expression of those 3 proteins in s-IBM muscle fibers. Omission of the primary antibodies resulted in negative reactions. B,D,F demonstrate densitometric analysis of the respective blots of A,C,E, performed using NIH Image J 1.310. Protein-loading was evaluated by the actin band. Data are indicated as mean ± standard error. The level of significance was set at p<0.05. Details in the text.

Figure 4 .4Figure 4. (A). Immunoprecipitations (IP) of control and s-IBM biopsies with antibody against parkin, followed by immunoblotting (IB) with an antibody against α-syn, show in both biopsies a 22kDa band of α-syn. Omission of the anti-parkin antibody from the immunoprecipitation reaction (*) or omission of the primary α-syn antibody from the immunoblots (#), resulted in no bands being present. (B,C,D) immunoprecipitations (IP) of s-IBM muscle biopsies with antibody against parkin, followed by immunoblotting (IB) with (B) antibody against UbcH7, (C) 6E10 against AβPP/Aβ, and (D) antibody s5a against 19S proteasome subunit -these show bands corresponding to molecular weights of the respective proteins. * = omission of anti-parkin antibody from the immunoprecipitation reactions; # = omission of the primary antibodies from the immunoblotting. Both * and # were always negative. E and F illustrate ubiquitinated bands of α-syn and AβPP in s-IBM muscle fibers, achieved after immunoprecipitation with antibody against α-syn (E) or 6E10 against AβPP/Aβ (F), followed by immunoblotting with antibody against ubiquitin (E, and F1). In (E) there are several α-syn ubiquitinated bands at 32, 40, 62, 70 and 90 kDa, while control* shows only an IgG band, and control # is negative. In (F1) there are two AβPP ubiquitinated bands at 150 and 180 kDa, while in (F2), in which the same immunoprecipitate as in (F1) was immunoprobed with 6E10 antibody against AβPP/Aβ there is a strong 130kDa band, and weaker 150 and 180 kDa bands present (details in the text); controls * (no primary antibody in the immunoprecipitation solution), and # (no primary antibody in the immunoblotting) do not show any bands. G illustrates deglycosylation experiments with a normal human muscle biopsy homogenate, which was immunoprecipitated with antibody against parkin, deglycosylated, electrophoresed, and immunoblotted with an antibody against α-syn. After deglycosylation with O-glycosidase and sialidase A, but not with N-glycosidase, the 22 kDa band of α-syn shifted to 16kDa position, indicating that the 22kDa band in human muscle is O-glycosylated.

Figure 6 .6Figure 6. Immunoblots and immunoprecipitation in cultured human muscle fibers. (A) Representative immunoblot of parkin in one culture set illustrating all the experimental conditions used. Lanes 1-4 show a strong 22kDa band and much weaker 52 kDa band. (B) Densitometric analysis of the 22kDa parkin isoform in the same six sets of cultures. Protein loading was evaluated by the actin band. Data are indicated as mean ± standard error.Significance was set at p<0.05. The analysis shows that the 22kDa parkin band is greatly increased in the AβPPoverexpressing (ABPP+) cultured muscle fibers, and that epoxomicin significantly increased 22kDa parkin in both control and the AβPP+ fibers. (C-E) Immunoprecipitations (IP) of control (C), and of control and AβPP+ cultured muscle fibers (D,E) using antibody against parkin followed by immunoblotting (IB) with antibody against α-syn (C), 6E10 against AβPP/Aβ (D), and s5a against Rpn10 19S proteasome (E). These revealed bands corresponding to the respective proteins (details in the text), indicating physical association of parkin with each of them. * indicates negative controls as in Fig.4.

