Inclusion body myositis with human immunodeficiency virus infection: Four cases with clonal expansion of viral-specific T cells

Objective: Sporadic inclusion body myositis (sIBM), a common adult-onset myositis, is characterized by an antigen-driven inflammatory response and vacuolar degeneration. The cause is unknown. We report the association of sIBM with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection and explore the clonality and viral specificity of the autoinvasive T cells. Methods: Clinicopathological studies in four HIV-infected patients with IBM were performed. The clonal restriction of endomysial T cells, compared with peripheral blood, was examined by spectratyping. Immunohistochemical studies using human leukocyte antigen-A* 0201-gag tetramers and the most dominant Vb families were performed in serial muscle biopsy sections to examine whether clonally expanded autoinvasive T cells are viral specific and invade muscle fibers expressing the allele-specific monomorphic major histocompatibility complex class I antigen. Results: Prominent clonal restriction of certain Vb families was noted among the endomysial T cells with evidence of in situ expansion. Approximately 10% of the autoinvasive CD8 ϩ cells were human leukocyte antigen-A* 0201-HIV-gag specific and invaded muscle fibers expressing the specific human leukocyte antigen-A* 0201 allele. These cells belonged to restricted Vb families. The HIV gag antigen was present on several endomysial macrophages but not within the muscle fibers. Interpretation: sIBM develops in patients who harbor HIV. In HIV-IBM, a subset of CD8 ϩ T cells surrounding muscle fibers are viral specific and may play a role in the disease mechanism by cross-reacting with antigens on the surface of muscle fibers. This study provides a paradigm that a chronic viral infection in genetically susceptible individuals can trigger viral specific T cell clones that persist within the muscle and lead to development of sIBM.

eases, primary immunodeficiency, paraproteinemias, and possesses distinct human leukocyte antigen (HLA) haplotypes. 15,16 Since its original description, sIBM was considered to be caused by a chronic viral infection because the filaments within the inclusions resembled paramyxovirus nucleocapsids. 17,18 An isolation of adenovirus type II from the muscle biopsy specimen was also reported. 19 Despite of the reported positive immunostaining of the inclusions by antibodies to mumps virus antigens, however, 18 molecular and serological techniques failed to amplify viruses from the patients' muscle or sera. 20 The closest connection with viruses has been the observation that sIBM can be seen in association with HIV and human T-lymphocytic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) infection, two neurotropic viruses with different disease pathogenesis and distinctive character resulting in immune dysregulation or immunodeficiency. 21 Because these retroviruses were not detected within the muscle fibers, it was concluded that they did not directly infect the muscle, but rather triggered an inflammatory response against muscle. 21 Since our first description of three IBM cases in patients with retroviruses almost 10 years ago, 21 there have been at least three other cases reported, [22][23][24] and we have been referred nine more cases, suggesting that this association is not fortuitous.

We now report studies in four new cases of sIBM in patients with HIV infection and describe the molecular mechanism of viral-specific T cells that invade the muscle fibers. We provide evidence that the autoinvasive CD8 ϩ T cells are clonally expanded and viral specific, and invade muscle fibers that express MHC-I antigen. The findings shed light on the role of viruses as triggering factors in sIBM.

Patients and Methods

Patient 1

A 55-year-old African American man was diagnosed with HIV-1 infection in 1996, at the age of 44, after an episode of flulike symptoms with shortness of breath due to Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia. He was placed on triple antiretroviral therapy that included AZT (zidovudine) with improvement of his symptoms and stabilization of CD4 cell count (Ͼ400/ml) and reduction of viral load. One year after treatment was started, he developed a slow-onset weakness in both legs, predominantly in the hip flexors and knee extensors, and increase of creatine kinase (CK) concentration. A quadriceps muscle biopsy showed inflammatory myopathy, which was read as "either polymyositis or inclusion body myositis" (slides were not available for review). AZT was discontinued, and treatment with oral prednisone therapy was begun without any clinical benefit. Between 2000 and 2002, he was treated with newer antiretroviral therapies that did not include zidovudine. His viral load was suppressed (most recent: 165 copies/ml) and the CD4 cell count increased (most recent: 676 copies/ml), but his leg weakness continued to deteriorate to the point of requiring a cane for ambulation. Weakness and atrophy gradually progressed to the upper extremities with involvement of the proximal and distal muscles, most prominent in the finger and wrist flexors, in a pattern consistent with the sIBM phenotype. [1][2][3][4][5] Mild dysphagia for solid foods was also noted.

When seen at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), 7 years after the onset of the myopathy, the patient had marked weakness and atrophy of hip flexors, knee extensors, forearms, and intrinsic hand muscles. Sensory examination was normal, and tendon reflexes were present. CK concentration was high at 2,000IU/L. Two muscle biopsies performed at the NIH, one in 2003 and another in 2004, showed severe endomysial inflammation with numerous vacuolated and cytochrome oxidase (COX)-negative fibers, occasional necrotic muscle fibers, multiple internalized nuclei, and eosinophilic inclusions (Fig 1). Amyloid was also detected in several vacuolated myofibers. The patient was homozygous for the HLA A* haplotype 0201.

Patient 2

Patient 2 is a 59-year-old white man diagnosed with HIV infection in 1987 and treated with antiretroviral therapy that included AZT for 4 years. At the end of this period, at 49 years old, he developed proximal leg muscle weakness with myalgia and mild dysphagia. The CK concentration was increased (up to 1,000IU/L). Zidovudine was removed from the anti-HIV regimen, but his weakness continued to worsen. Quadriceps muscle biopsy showed inflammatory myopathy. Treatment with high-dose prednisone for several months helped the pain but not the weakness. His strength continued to worsen expanding to his hand grip and arms with concomitant atrophy. His CD4 cell count was 240 cells/ml, and his HIV viral load 180 copies/ml. When seen at the NIH (14 years after the onset of myopathy), he had diffuse limb muscle weakness and wasting most prominent in the quadriceps, foot extensors, and the intrinsic hand muscles. He used a cane or a walker for ambulation. He had significant dysphagia. Sensory examination showed reduction of pinprick and vibratory sensation in both feet with absent ankle jerks. Electrophysiological studies showed a chronic sensory axonal polyneuropathy and an active myopathy with fibrillation potentials and positive sharp waves, as seen in sIBM. [1][2][3][4][5] Two muscle biopsies over a 6-month period performed at the NIH were consistent with sporadic IBM demonstrating marked endomysial inflammation, red-rimmed vacuolated fibers, cytochrome-oxidase negative fibers, and amyloid-positive fibers. His HLA A* haplotype was 0201.

Patient 3

Patient 3 is a 46-year-old Hispanic man, diagnosed with HIV-1 infection in 1996. Several months later, he noted a slow-onset weakness in his arms and hands. Highly active antiretroviral therapy including zidovudine was initiated and provided a significant reduction in HIV viral load. Because of the onset of mild muscle weakness, AZT was discontinued, but the patient continued to experience a gradual decline in the strength of finger flexors and proximal leg muscles. His CK concentration was 784IU/L. His antiretroviral regimen that did not include AZT stabilized the CD4 cell count, between 500 and 600 cells/ml, and reduced the viral load. A muscle biopsy was read as consistent with "chronic inflammatory myopathy, probably sIBM." He received two courses of intravenous immunoglobulin treatments without benefit. When seen at the NIH 8 years after the onset of the myopathy, he had mild facial muscle and neck flexor weakness, reduced strength and atrophy in the quadriceps muscles (Medical Research Council grade 4Ϫ), and distal weakness in the feet and finger flexors. Tendon reflexes and sensory examination were normal. Muscle biopsy performed at the NIH demonstrated moderate endomysial inflammation, vacuolated (red-rimmed and nonrimmed) muscle fibers with eosinophilic inclusions, increased internal nuclei and connective tissue, and groups of atrophic fibers. Stain for amyloid was positive. His HLA-A* haplotype was 2601.

Patient 4

Patient 4 is a 56-year-old white man who had been HIVpositive for 17 years. He had been treated with various antiretroviral regimens but never with AZT. About 10 years ago, at the age of 45, he developed weakness and muscle aches in both thighs. A course of oral prednisone helped the pain but not the strength. His strength continued to worsen, extending to both arms and legs. Several years later, he had prominent proximal and distal arm and leg weakness and mild dysphagia. His CK concentration was increased at 465IU/L. Muscle biopsy showed findings consistent with sIBM. Treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin for several months resulted in marginal improvement of his gait stability but not his strength. Gradually, an increase in viral load was noted. When seen at the NIH, he had marked weakness of hip flexors and weakness with atrophy in the quadriceps, proximal arm muscles, finger flexors, and foot extensors. He required a cane for ambulation. He also had mild facial muscle weakness. Tendon reflexes were absent in the lower extremities. Muscle biopsy demonstrated redrimmed vacuolated fibers, endomysial inflammation, increased connective tissue, and variation in fiber size. Sensory examination was normal. His HLA-A* haplotype was 0101.

Blood and Muscle Samples

We investigated the peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) and corresponding muscle biopsy specimens from three HIV-IBM patients (Patient 1-3), as well as the PBL from Patient 4. We compared our findings with similar experiments performed on the PBLs and corresponding muscle biopsies of 12 sIBM patients (6 men and 6 women) who fulfilled the typical clinical, electrophysiological, and histopathological criteria of the disease. 25 In all patients, PBLs were obtained through lymphocytapheresis and Ficoll separation, and the corresponding open muscle biopsies were performed within 1 to 2 days after lymphocytapheresis. Muscle biopsy was obtained from the biceps muscle in the HIV Patients 1 through 3, and in the HIV-negative sIBM patients from the biceps in 11 and the quadriceps in 1 patient. Four normal control PBL specimens were obtained through lymphocytapheresis from the NIH Blood Bank. All patients had been admitted to the NIH Clinical Center and studied under Institutional Review Board-approved clinical protocols.

Fig 1. Cross section of a muscle biopsy from Patient 1 stained with hematoxylin and eosin demonstrates the intense inflammatory response around healthy-appearing muscle fibers together with several red-rimmed vacuolated fibers (A). Crystal violet-positive amyloid deposits (B) and several cytochrome oxidase (COX)-negative fibers (C) are prominent. T-Cell Receptor Spectratyping in the Peripheral Blood and Muscle Biopsies

EXTRACTION OF MESSENGER RNA AND REVERSE TRAN-SCRIPTION POLYMERASE CHAIN REACTION. Total RNA was extracted from 10 to 20mg muscle and 5 ϫ 10 6 PBLs using the RNeasy Kit from Qiagen (Valencia, CA), following the supplier's instructions. The RNA was eluted in 50l water and stored at Ϫ80°C. Complementary DNA (cDNA) was synthesized using 0.2g RNA using the SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase kit from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA), following the supplier's instructions. The resulting cDNA was stored at Ϫ20°C.

POLYMERASE CHAIN REACTION AMPLIFICATION AND

CDR3 DETERMINATION. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification was conducted using 0.5l cDNA, in a 20l reaction, with 0.5 unit Taq DNA Polymerase, 0.5 unit Taq Antibody, 1.5mM MgCl 2 , and 0.2mM dNTP (deoxyribonucleotide triphosphate) in PCR buffer (all from Invitrogen). A total of 0.5M FAM-labeled C␤ primer was used with 0.5M primer, belonging to each of the 24 different TCR V␤ families, with primer sequences as described previously. 26 In separate reactions, the following were used: 0.5M FAMlabeled CD4-L primer, with 0.5M nonlabeled CD4-R; 0.5M FAM-labeled CD8-L primer, with 0.5M nonlabeled CD8-R; and 0.5M left and 0.5M right nonlabeled GAPDH (glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase) primers, as positive controls. Negative controls lacking cDNA were run with each PCR. The PCR products (10l) were submitted to gel electrophoresis, using 2% agarose gel with 0.2g/ml ethidium bromide, and the bands visualized by an Alpha Imager (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). A total of 4l of the PCR product was diluted 1:15 and run through POP4-polymer-filled capillary arrays using the ABI Prism 3100 Genetic analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). The Genescan Analysis Software (Applied Biosystems) was utilized for peak visualization. The following definitions were used for semiquantitative peak analysis of the CDR3 lengths: monoclonal pattern, denoting the presence of a single peak (with the next highest peak being less than 15% in height), or restricted pattern, denoting the presence of one to three peaks (with the next highest peak being less than 15% in height).

To determine whether the clonally expanded T cells are autoinvasive, we used antibodies against V␤5 and Vb23 (two of the most commonly observed clonotypes) in a dual staining with CD8 (see later for description).

Immunohistochemistry

HUMAN LEUKOCYTE ANTIGEN-A* 0201-GAG TETRAMER.

Class I MHC-peptide tetramers are composed of a complex of four MHC molecules each bound to a peptide. HLA-A*0201-1 gag tetramers bind the HIV gag peptide and recognize CD8 ϩ T cells with TCRs specific for this particular MHC-peptide complex. 27 Because only HIV gag tetramers bound to HLA-A x 0201 haplotype are available, we performed immunostaining on the muscle biopsies only from Patients 1 and 2, who were HLA A*0201-positive, to assess whether among the autoinvasive CD8 ϩ cells are clones specific to this viral epitope. Streptavidin-phycoerythrin-conjugated HLA A*0201-HIV gag tetramers carrying a nine-residue HIV gag sequence SYYNTVATL (amino acids 77-85) (Beckman Coulter, San Diego, CA) were used on serial muscle biopsy sections in 1:10 dilution. After 60 minutes, sections were washed and incubated with anti-phycoerythrin mouse monoclonal antibody (1:100; Sigma, St. Louis, MO) in phosphate-buffered saline/bovine serum albumin, followed by anti-mouse IgG antibody conjugated to Alexa 488 (green color; Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR). The same sections were subsequently immunostained with goat anti-rabbit IgG antibody to CD8 ϩ T cells conjugated to Alexa 594 (red color; Molecular Probes) in a 1:500 dilution to determine whether the tetramer-positive cells were also CD8 ϩ . Omission of the gag-tetramer or the primary anti-CD8 antibody were used to confirm the specificity of the immunocytochemical reactions. Furthermore, as negative controls, we used muscle biopsies from two sIBM patients and from Patient 3 who had different HLA-A alleles.

HUMAN LEUKOCYTE ANTIGEN A* 02 EXPRESSION ON MUS-CLE FIBERS. The HLA-A* 0201 expression on the muscle fibers was confirmed by immunostaining the muscle from Patients 1 and 2 with the monoclonal antibody HLA-A2, which is allele specific for the monomorphic HLA-A* 0201. As controls, we used muscle biopsies from two sIBM patients and Patient 3, who had different HLA-A alleles. The specificity of the immunoreactivity was confirmed by omitting the primary antibody, as described previously elsewhere. 8,9 CLONAL EXPANSION OF VIRAL-SPECIFIC CD8 ϩ T CELLS.

To determine whether the tetramer-positive, viral-specific, autoinvasive CD8 ϩ T cells belong to one of the clonally expanded V␤ families, we used immunocytochemistry utilizing monoclonal anti-V␤5 antibody (Beckman Coulter) and streptavidin-phycoerythrin tetramer in 5m serial sections. This was done by applying one of the primary antibodies for 60 minutes in 1:10 dilution followed by anti-PE monoclonal antibody (1:100) for 30 minutes. After washing, the sections were incubated with anti-mouse IgG conjugated to Alexa 488 (green color) for tetramer visualization or anti-mouse IgG conjugated to Alexa 594 (red color) for V␤5 visualization. To demonstrate colocalization of the tetramer-positive cells with TCR V␤5-positive T cells, we superimposed the fluorescent images corresponding to the same cells.

LOCALIZATION OF VIRAL ANTIGENS. Monoclonal antibody to HIV gag p17 peptide (US Biologicals, Swampscott, MA), together with monoclonal antibody against CD68 antigen (which identifies macrophages but also dendritic cells; Spring Biosciences, Fremont, CA) were used in dual immunostaining. Sections were incubated with the anti-HIV p17 (amino acids 1-133 of the gag polyprotein) followed by anti-mouse Alexa 488 (green color), and then with antibody against CD68 followed by Alexa 594 (red color) to detect whether the viral-positive cells were macrophages.

Results

Spectratyping: Clonal Expansion of T-Cell Receptor V␤ Gene Segments in the Muscles and Peripheral Blood Lymphocytes of Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Inclusion Body Myositis

PERIPHERAL BLOOD LYMPHOCYTES IN HUMAN IMMUNO-DEFICIENCY VIRUS-INCLUSION BODY MYOSITIS VERSUS SPORADIC INCLUSION BODY MYOSITIS VERSUS CON-

TROLS. A diverse repertoire of CDR3-length distribution was noted in the controls as demonstrated by the Gaussian-like profile (Fig 2 ; first column). In the PBL of sIBM, up to 5% of the Vb families had a monoclonal pattern, and 16% a restricted pattern (fourth column). 25 In contrast, in the PBL of HIV-IBM, up to 18% of the Vb families had a monoclonal pattern ( p Ͻ 0.02, compared with sIBM), and 47.2% had a restricted pattern ( p Ͻ 0.02, compared with sIBM) (see Fig 2, as shown for Patients 1 and 2), indicating clonal expansion of T cells in the peripheral blood.

MUSCLE BIOPSIES OF HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS-INCLUSION BODY MYOSITIS COMPARED WITH SPORADIC

INCLUSION BODY MYOSITIS. The overall frequency of V␤ restriction was similar in both HIV-IBM and sIBM (24% monoclonal and 72% restricted in HIV-IBM, compared with 27% and 71%, respectively, in sIBM) ( p Ͻ 0.95). The highly restricted pattern of expression of V␤23 and V␤24 was noted in both groups; 100% in HIV-IBM, and 80% in sIBM. Some families such as V␤5, 6, 17, and 22 were predominantly restricted only in HIV-IBM (see Fig 2). We compared the spectratypes generated from the PBLs with those from the muscle to determine whether the same dominant peaks seen in the blood correspond to those seen in the muscle. We found that the corresponding TCR ␤-chain CDR3 spectratyping profile in PBLs were more diverse than those seen in the muscle. Although up to 47% of V␤ families in PBLs had a restrictive pattern (monoclonal or oligoclonal), 72% of the same families were restricted among the T cells within the muscle tissue, indicating clonal expansion of T cells within the muscle microenvironment. The number of samples (only three biopsies from Patients 1-3) was, however, too small to reach significance 

. Spectratyping of peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) and endomysial T cells in human immunodeficiency virus-inclusion body myositis (HIV-IBM). A Gaussian pattern of distribution is seen in the control PBLs. In contrast, an increased incidence of T-cell receptors with a monoclonal or restricted pattern (up to 47%) is seen in the HIV-PBL compared with normal PBLs and those from the sporadic IBM (sIBM).

The restriction is more prominent in the patients' muscle, where up to 72% of the families are restricted or have a monoclonal pattern. Although some of the Vb families were also restricted in the HIV-PBL, several families were restricted only in the muscle, probably driven by different antigenic stimuli. The overall degree of restriction of endomysial T cells in HIV-IBM was similar to sIBM, but some families, such as V␤ 5, 6, 17, and 22 were predominantly restricted only in HIV-IBM.

( p Ͻ 0.1). Some of these families, such as V␤5, 6, 17, 22, 23, and 24, were 100% restricted in the muscle compared with PBL (see Fig 2). In contrast, some of the most dominant Vb families with a restricted pattern found in the PBLs, such as Vb1, 9, 11, 15, and 19, were less restricted in the muscle, indicating diversity of the T-cell populations among the two compartments probably driven by different antigenic stimuli.

THE CLONALLY EXPANDED T CELLS ARE AUTOINVASIVE.

Double immunocytochemistry with anti-CD8 antibody was done on the muscle biopsies of Patients 1 and 2 for two representative Vb families, the Vb5 and Vb23, because they were the most prominent clonally expanded V␤ families, and antibodies against them were available. We found that the Vb5 was more abundant in the muscle compared with Vb23. Furthermore, as shown for a representative V␤5 family in Figure 3, the tested families belonged to autoinvasive CD8 ϩ cells.

Major Histocompatibility Complex Class I Allele Specificity and Human Leukocyte Antigen A* 0201-HIV-gag-Specific T Cells in the Muscles of Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Inclusion Body Myositis Patients

The The viral specificity of the infiltrating T cells was examined by the MHC-I/peptide tetramers to visualize whether among the autoinvasive CD8 ϩ cells there were cells viral specific to the gag epitope. As shown in Fig- ure 4C-E, among the CD8 ϩ T cells surrounding or invading the muscle fibers, a subset of them were specific for the gag tetramer. No such cells were identified in Patient 3, who had a different HLA-A allele, or in the two non-HIV-IBM muscles used as controls.

Based on counting of CD8 ϩ cells in five 40X regions and calculating the percentage among those that were gag-positive, gag-tetramer was present in 10% of T cells.

To examine whether some of the clonally expanded autoinvasive CD8 ϩ T cells found in the muscle represent proliferation of gag-specific clones, we sought to demonstrate whether some of the most dominant Vb families were represented among the tetramer-positive cells. Serial sections immunostained for tetramer and for Vb5, one of the most dominant Vb families in the muscle tissue, demonstrated that a number of tetramerpositive cells belonged to at least one of the clonally expanded families, as shown by the superimposed images of Vb5 with tetramer (Fig 5).

Viral Antigens within the Muscle Tissue

The Gag p17 viral antigen was present only on CD68positive infiltrating macrophages or dendritic cells but not within the muscle fibers not shown, confirming previous observations. 21 A count on CD68 ϩ cells demonstrated that 15% of them carried the Gag p 17 antigen.

Discussion

We report four cases of sIBM in HIV-positive patients and demonstrate that clonally expanded and viralspecific CD8 ϩ T cells are recruited within the muscle to surround or invade muscle fibers. The observations suggest that in sIBM, thought by some to be a strictly degenerative disease, viruses (HIV may be the first identified example) can trigger a viral-specific inflammatory response that may lead to disease initiation.

Cumulative evidence indicates that sIBM occurs in a setting of retroviruses. We have initially reported this association in two HIV and one HTLV-1-positive patient. 21 Since then, three more retrovirus-positive sIBM (two with HTLV-1 and one with HIV) have been reported. [22][23][24] Over the past 3 years, we have also seen one more HTLV-1-IBM case and have been referred a total of seven new HIV-IBM (the four cases reported here and three additional ones: one from Tennessee, another from New York, and a third from Pittsburgh). Collectively, more than 14 cases of sIBM (5 with HTLV-1 and 9 with HIV) are known to us, indicating that this association is not fortuitous. It appears that certain genetically susceptible individuals who harbor the virus for many years can develop sIBM. HIV-IBM develops in patients slightly younger than those with sIBM, as the mean age of the present patients at the time of disease onset was 44 years. Our two previous cases, (observed before the availability of the highly active antiretroviral therapy), as well as the reported HTLV-1-positive patients, were even younger, with a mean age of 35 years at onset. Although histological changes resembling sIBM may be seen in patients exposed to AZT, 28 our cases are not related to AZT toxicity for the following reasons: (1) their clinicopathological pattern was not the one described with AZT;

(2) the patients' strength did not improve after AZT discontinuation, but continued to worsen; and (3) some patients were not even exposed to AZT or the exposure was brief.

HIV was not present within the muscle fibers but only within the CD68 ϩ macrophages or dendritic cells found in the close proximity to the muscle fibers, confirming previous observations. 1,29 -31 Cytokines and chemokines released by the infected macrophages within the muscle microenvironment may upregulate MHC-I expression on muscle fibers and enhance T-cell activation and recruitment. Such local signals from the infected endomysial macrophages may be partially responsive for the persistence of chronic inflammation, which remained brisk in all our patients' muscles based on repeated biopsies performed two to three times during a mean follow-up period of 9 years (range, 7-14 years). It is possible that the infected macrophages behave as antigen-presenting cells and activate naive T cells, among those recruited nonspecifically to the muscle, to become viral specific and recognize crossreactive muscle antigens.

The restricted usage of TCR V␤ families even among the autoinvasive CD8 ϩ T cells has been reported previously in sIBM. 9 -11,25 Here, not only do we confirm such a clonal expansion, but we demonstrate that it was even more restricted compared with sIBM, both in the muscle and the peripheral blood, owing to persistent viral infection. Of importance, several of the dominant families among the endomysial T cells were restricted only in the muscle, indicating in situ expansion probably driven by local antigens. Because viral-specific autoinvasive CD8 ϩ cells were present among the restricted T-cell clones, the local expansion within the muscle might have occurred through molecular mimicry between viral gag peptides and cross-reacting self antigens. Supporting this hypothesis is the reported sequence homologies between 

. Cross section of muscle biopsy from Patient 1 that possesses the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) A* 0201 haplotype, immunostained with monoclonal antibodies against the major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC-I) allele-specific monomorphic antibody against HLA-A* 0201 demonstrates strong sarcolemmal expression (A). In contrast, the same antibody did not recognize this HLA-A allele in the biopsy from Patient 3 that was HLA-A 0201-negative (B). Sections from the same muscles, dually immunostained with antibodies to HLA-A* 0201-HIV-gag tetramers and CD8, demonstrate that a number of CD8 ϩ T cells surrounding the muscle fibers (C) are viral specific (D) as depicted by the dual immunostaining with anti-tetramer and CD8 (E).

sarcolemmal proteins and gag retroviral peptides. 32,33 It is also possible that some cytotoxic T cells might have caused muscle fiber damage as a bystander effect triggered by an antiviral-induced immune response, similar to the one demonstrated in the brain lesions of mice infected by the lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus. 34 It is worth noting that our patients were able to mount an immune response because the myopathy developed and progressed during the period of immunocompetence (sufficient CD4 ϩ T cells and modest but persistent viral load), suggesting that the development and progression of the myopathic process were not related to the severity of the HIV disease.

Although the number of tetramer-specific CD8 ϩ T cells among the autoinvasive T cells was rather small, accounting for approximately 10% of the CD8 ϩ cells, it is likely that other, retroviral-specific but gagtetramer-negative, T cells targeting different epitopes of the HIV virus (ie, gp41 glycoprotein) might have been present among the infiltrates. The development of sIBM in a setting of HIV infection may be related to cytotoxic CD8 ϩ cells specific for certain HIV antigens that either cross-react with muscle proteins or can elicit an immune response. Differences in the pathogenic role of viral-specific CD8 ϩ T cells have been shown for the chronic hepatitis B virus infection where CD8 ϩ T cells specific for different hepatitis B virus antigens are differentially regulated and play distinct roles during the chronic infection. 35 The causative relation between the autoinvasive viral-specific CD8 ϩ T cells and vacuolar degeneration is unclear. Because CD8 ϩ T cells invaded intact MHC-I-expressing muscle fibers and the MHC-I expression was ubiquitous in vacuolated fibers not invaded by T cells, an endoplasmic reticulum cell-stress response mediated by MHC-I may be a strong contributing factor. 1,36 As previously proposed, the released cytokines from the virus infection upregulate MHC-I, which increases the levels of the MHC-peptide loading complex and induces endoplasmic reticulum-stress response, resulting in accumulation of misfolded amyloid-related glycoproteins. 1 The observations that autophagic vacuoles, protein aggregates, and formation of aggresomes, which are prominent in sIBM, 37 are sites of viral replication and certain viruses induce the formation of aggresomes 38 provide a link between viruses and the morphological features of sIBM. Whether retroviruses are capable of forming aggresomes within the muscle either directly in a "hit-andrun" phenomenon or indirectly via the infected mac- rophages that carry the viruses within the muscle fibers remains to be determined.

Both HIV-IBM and sIBM are characterized by identical immunopathology of clonally expanded CD8 ϩ T cells invading MHC-I-expressing muscle fibers. 39 These observations that some of the autoinvasive CD8 ϩ T clones are viral specific suggests that a chronic viral infection in genetically susceptible individuals can trigger a persistent T-cell-mediated inflammatory process that could lead to development of sIBM. A similar mechanism has been proposed for sIBM occurring with HTLV-1 infection. 22,40 As in sIBM where the clonally expanded T cells persist even in different muscles for several years, 10,11 we found that in HIV-IBM the inflammation also persists over time based on repeated muscle biopsies, perhaps driven by the same antigenic stimuli, that is, viral peptides cross-reacting with specific muscle antigens. The chronicity of the infection and the recruitment of specific T-cell populations within the muscle may be essential for the development of such an indolent disease as sIBM. 

We thank the patients for participating in the study and express our deep appreciation to the following physicians who referred the patients to the NIH: Dr. Peter Bosch, Dr. Robert Shebert, Dr. Steven G. Herman and Dr. Azziz Shaibani.

CORRELATION OF T-CELL RESTRICTION BETWEEN PERIPH-ERAL BLOOD LYMPHOCYTES AND MUSCLE IN HUMAN IM-MUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS-INCLUSION BODY MYOSITIS.

Fig 22Fig 2. Spectratyping of peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) and endomysial T cells in human immunodeficiency virus-inclusion body myositis (HIV-IBM). A Gaussian pattern of distribution is seen in the control PBLs. In contrast, an increased incidence of T-cell receptors with a monoclonal or restricted pattern (up to 47%) is seen in the HIV-PBL compared with normal PBLs and those from the sporadic IBM (sIBM). The restriction is more prominent in the patients' muscle, where up to 72% of the families are restricted or have a monoclonal pattern. Although some of the Vb families were also restricted in the HIV-PBL, several families were restricted only in the muscle, probably driven by different antigenic stimuli. The overall degree of restriction of endomysial T cells in HIV-IBM was similar to sIBM, but some families, such asV␤ 5, 6, 17, and 22 were predominantly restricted only in HIV-IBM.

MHC class I allele-specific molecule was upregulated on the muscle fibers, as shown by the strong immunostaining of HLA-A* 0201 antigen only on the muscle fibers of HIV-IBM patients possessing the HLA-A x 0201 haplotype (Fig 4A). In contrast, the muscle fibers from Patient 3 or another sIBM patient with different HLA haplotype did not immunoreact with the MHC-1-HLA* 0201 antibody (see Fig 4B).

Fig 3 .3Fig 3. Cross sections of a muscle biopsy from Patient 1 dually immunostained for Vb5 (one of the most prominent clonally expanded Vb family) in green (left) and for CD8 ϩ cells in red (center). Vb5-positive cells invade the center of the muscle fiber. TheseVb5-positive cells are autoinvasive CD8 ϩ cells, as confirmed by the double exposure (in orange, right).

Fig 44Fig 4. Cross section of muscle biopsy from Patient 1 that possesses the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) A* 0201 haplotype, immunostained with monoclonal antibodies against the major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC-I) allele-specific monomorphic antibody against HLA-A* 0201 demonstrates strong sarcolemmal expression (A). In contrast, the same antibody did not recognize this HLA-A allele in the biopsy from Patient 3 that was HLA-A 0201-negative (B). Sections from the same muscles, dually immunostained with antibodies to HLA-A* 0201-HIV-gag tetramers and CD8, demonstrate that a number of CD8 ϩ T cells surrounding the muscle fibers (C) are viral specific (D) as depicted by the dual immunostaining with anti-tetramer and CD8 (E).

Fig 5 .5Fig 5. The tetramer-positive CD8 ϩ cells that surrounded the muscle fibers belong to clonally expanded families, as shown with double immunostaining for a representative Vb5 family and tetramer. Sections from two different patients (A-C and D-F) are shown.

This research was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the NIH (National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke).

