β-Amyloid is a substrate of autophagy in sporadic inclusion body myositis

Objective: Sporadic Inclusion Body Myositis (sIBM) is the most common acquired muscle disease in patients above 50 years of age. Apart from inflammation in the skeletal muscle, overexpression of amyloid precursor protein (APP) and intracellular accumulation of its proteolytic fragment ␤-amyloid play a central role in the pathogenesis of sIBM. In neurodegenerative disorders, similar aggregations of aberrant proteins have recently been shown to be susceptible to autophagic degradation. Therefore, we analyzed macroautophagy of APP in human muscle cell lines and sIBM muscle biopsies. Methods: Colocalization of APP with the essential autophagy protein Atg8/LC3, which associates with preautophagosomal and autophagosomal membranes via lipidation, was analyzed in the CCL-136 muscle cell line and muscle biopsies by immunofluorescence. While APP was visualized with specific antibodies in the muscle cell line and in tissue sections. Atg8/LC3 localization was analyzed after GFP-Atg8/LC3 transfection or with an Atg8/LC3 specific antiserum, respectively. Results: We demonstrate here that Atg8/LC3 colocalizes with APP in cultured human muscle cells. In addition, APP/␤amyloid-containing autophagosomes can be observed at increased frequency in muscle fibers of sIBM muscle biopsies, but not in non-myopathic muscle or non-vacuolated myopathic controls. APP/␤-amyloid and Atg8/LC3 double-positive compartments were almost exclusively observed in degenerating muscle fibers of the type II (fast-twitching) and were in part associated with overexpression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and II on myofibers and invasion by CD4 ϩ and CD8 ϩ cells. Interpretation: These findings indicate that APP/␤-amyloid is targeted for lysosomal degradation via macroautophagy and suggest that the autophagy pathway should be explored for its potential therapeutic merit in sIBM.

Sporadic inclusion body myositis (sIBM) is a progressive, debilitating skeletal myopathy that is most commonly observed in patients older than 50 years. The cause of sIBM is unknown, and its complex pathogenesis includes immune-mediated and degenerative mechanisms. 1 Overexpression of amyloid precursor protein (APP) and subsequent accumulation of cleaved fragments including ␤-amyloid in vacuolated muscle fibers is considered a central mechanism in the pathogenesis of sIBM. 2 Eukaryotic cells contain two major protein degradation systems. One is the ubiquitin-proteasome system, which accounts for the selective degradation of most short-lived proteins. The other is the lysosomal system. Lysosomal degradation of exogenous material is mediated by the process of endocytosis/phagocytosis, whereas degradation of cytoplasmic components occurs after autophagy. During macroautophagy, the beststudied autophagic pathway, double-membrane vesicles termed autophagosomes are formed, which sequester cytosolic constituents as cargo, and then fuse with lysosomes. Basal macroautophagy is ubiquitous in eukaryotes 3 and allows for the constitutive removal of cytosolic proteins and organelles.

The microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 (LC3) is a human homologue of the yeast autophagy related gene 8 (Atg8), an essential autophagy protein.

It is processed from a full-length protein to a cleaved and lipidated form during autophagy. During this process, LC3 is coupled in an ubiquitin-like fashion, involving the E1 and E2 enzymes Atg7 and Atg3, to phosphatidylethanolamine in autophagosomal membranes. It remains associated with autophagosomes at the luminal side of the completed vesicles and is degraded after fusion with lysosomes. Therefore, lysosomal turnover of Atg8/LC3 is a good measure for autophagic activity. 3,4 At a pathophysiological level, macroautophagy is critically involved in the elimination of abnormal intracellular proteins that would otherwise accumulate within cells as aggregates or inclusions, and thus has been implicated to play a crucial role during protein aggregation in neurodegenerative disorders. [5][6][7] Given the central importance of macroautophagy for the quality control of intracellular proteins and its strong association with neurodegenerative diseases that display aggregate formation, we investigated the role of macroautophagy in skeletal muscle as a possible pathomechanism of sIBM.

Subjects and Methods Subjects

Muscle biopsies of patients with sIBM (n ϭ 9), who fulfilled typical clinical, electrophysiological, and histopathological criteria of the respective disease 1 or control muscle specimens including noninflammatory dystrophic myopathy (n ϭ 2), vacuolar myopathy as with ␣-glucosidase deficiency (Morbus Pompe) (n ϭ 2), and nonmyopathic muscle (n ϭ 2), were used (Table ). The clinical course of each patient was graded as follows: mild-minor paresis that does not impair daily activity; moderate-moderate paresis, but patient still ambulatory, at least with a cane; and severe-severe paresis with loss of ambulation and dependency on wheelchair. The patients were admitted to the National Institutes of Health Clinical Center or the Universities of Go ¨ttingen and Hannover and studied under institutional review board-approved clinical protocols.  

Cell Lines and Stable Transfectants

Antibodies

The LC3 antiserum was generated by repeated immunizations of rabbits with the N-terminal peptide LC3 1-15 (MPSEKTFKQRRTFEQR) conjugated to KLH carrier protein (Cocalico Biologicals, Reamstown, PA). Antiserum collected from one rabbit showed good LC3 reactivity by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and Western blot, and was used for immunofluorescent cytochemistry at a 1:1,000 dilution. A polyclonal rabbit anti-human APP antibody recognizing an epitope within the C terminus of the protein (AHP663; Serotec, Oxford, United Kingdom) and a rabbit OVA-specific antibody (Chemicon, Billerica, MA) was used at a 1:100 and 1:400 dilution, respectively.

Immunocytochemistry, Immunohistochemistry, and Immunofluorescence Microscopy

For immunocytochemistry, CCL-136 cells were plated on microscopy cover glasses in a 24-well plate and cultured overnight at 37°C. Cells were washed 1ϫ in phosphatebuffered saline (PBS) and fixed in 3% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 15 minutes. After washing once in PBS and permeabilization in 0.1% Triton X-100 (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) for 5 minutes, cells were blocked for 30 minutes in blocking buffer (from Perkin-Elmer's TSA kit; Perkin-Elmer, Oak Brook, IL) with 0.1% saponin. Primary and secondary antibodies were diluted in blocking buffer with 0.1% saponin and 5% donkey serum and incubated for 30 minutes. Rhodamine Red-X-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit IgG (Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Pine, PA) was used as secondary antibody. Nuclei were counterstained by 4Ј, 6-diamidino-2phenylindole (0.5g/ml; Invitrogen/Molecular Probes) for 1 minute; slides were mounted in Prolong Gold (Invitrogen/ Molecular Probes) and were allowed to dry in the dark. Cells were analyzed on an inverted LSM 510 laser-scanning confocal microscope (Axioverst 200; Zeiss, Go ¨ttingen, Germany) using a 405nm diode laser and an argon laser (488 and 543nm laser lines) and the LSM 510 confocal software (Zeiss). Colocalization of markers was quantified using the profile tool of the LSM 510 software by comparing the number of double-positive vesicles compared with the total number of red vesicles in 12 double-positive cells/condition. For immunohistochemistry, 5m frozen sections of muscle biopsy specimens were fixed either in 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 minutes (for LC3-and ␤-amyloid) or in acetone at Ϫ20°C for 10 minutes (for all other primary antibodies). Unspecific binding was reduced by 30-minute incubation with 5% bovine serum albumin and 3% goat serum (all from Jackson ImmunoResearch) in PBS. All primary and secondary reagents were diluted in 1% bovine serum albumin. The following primary antibodies were used at the respective concentration with an incubation time of 1 hour at room temperature unless stated otherwise: LC3 (rabbit antiserum; see earlier); anti-␤-amyloid (mouse clone 6E10; Signet, Dedham, MA) at 10g/ml for 24 hours at 4°C; anti-CD4 (mouse clone 34930 from R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) at 1.7g/ml; anti-CD8 (rat clone YTC 182.20 from Serotec, Raleigh, NC) at 6.7g/ml; anti-major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I (rat clone YTH 862.2 from Serotec) at 5g/ml; anti-MHC class II (mouse clone TDR 31.1 from Ancell, Bayport, MN) at 10g/ml. On five randomly selected sIBM muscle samples, serial sections were double-labeled by fluorescent staining for the following: (1) ␤-amyloid and LC-3, (2) MHC classes I and II, and (3) CD4 and CD8. Secondary reagents were goat anti-rabbit IgG-Alexa 594 or anti-mouse IgG-Alexa 488, respectively (Molecular Probes/Invitrogen). Preadsorption of the anti-LC3 antibody was performed by incubation with excess immunization peptide (200g/ml) for 2 hours at 37°C and centrifugation at approximately 18,000g for 30 minutes. Nuclear counterstaining was performed by 4Ј,6-diamidino-2phenylindole (s.a.), followed by mounting in Fluoromount G (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA). Immunofluorescent microscopy and digital photography were performed on a Zeiss Axiophot microscope (Zeiss, Go ¨ttingen, Germany), using appropriate filters for green (488nm), red (594nm), and blue (350nm) fluorescence, and a cooled charge-coupled device digital camera (Retiga 1300; Qimaging, Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada) using the Qcapture software. Conventional histochemistry included routine staining for hematoxylin and eosin and adenosine triphosphatase at pH 4.7. LC3 staining was quantified in all biopsies by manual analysis of 205 to 1,962 muscle fibers per patient. Serial sections of 5 sIBM patients were analyzed by microscopic photography with subsequent manual analysis of 285 to 779 fibers of all stainings from each patient.

Results

The Essential Autophagy Protein Atg8/LC3 Colocalizes with Amyloid Precursor Protein in Cultured Human Muscle Cells

To analyze macroautophagy, hereafter referred to as autophagy, we made use of the specific autophagosome marker Atg8/LC3. LC3 is an ubiquitin-like protein, which, via its C terminus, is covalently coupled to a phospholipid in newly forming inner and outer autophagosomal membranes, and thus is specifically incor-porated into autophagosomes. 8 The more autophagosomes fuse with lysosomes, the more Atg8/LC3 is degraded in autolysosomes. Therefore, lysosomal turnover of Atg8/LC3 is a good measure for autophagic activity. 3,4 We transfected the human muscle cell line CCL-136 with a GFP-Atg8/LC3 fusion construct to visualize autophagosomes in CCL-136 cells by fluorescence microscopy. GFP-Atg8/LC3 transfected cell lines were treated with the lysosomal acidification inhibitor chloroquine (CQ) to block lysosomal proteolysis, and thus visualize the accumulation of autophagosomes and autolysosomes as GFP-Atg8/LC3-positive vesicles. With these experiments, both the constitutive autophagosome content (without CQ treatment) and the autophagosome turnover (with CQ treatment) can be evaluated. 9 GFP-Atg8/LC3 strongly accumulated in cytosolic vesicles of CCL-136 cells after 10 hours of CQ treatment (Fig 1 ), suggesting that large numbers of GFP-Atg8/ LC3-labeled autophagosomes had formed and fused with lysosomes during the 10-hour observation period. These observations further indicate that autophagosomes continuously fuse with lysosomes in human muscle cells.

APP is constitutively expressed in the CCL-136 muscle cell line, and we could, therefore, analyze the degradation behavior of endogenous APP in these cells. After CQ treatment, APP strongly accumulated in perinuclear vesicular cell compartments, indicating at least partial lysosomal degradation of this protein. As shown by confocal microscopy, APP-positive compartments frequently colocalized with GFP-Atg8/LC3 in large autophagosomal structures (see Fig 1). When we quantified colocalization of APP with GFP-LC3 in cultured human CCL-136 muscle cells by overlaying the intensity profiles along cross sections of individual cells, we found that 39.2% of APP ϩ compartments in CQ-untreated and 49.3% of APP ϩ compartments in CQ-treated cells were GFP-LC3-positive. Similar findings were observed after overexpression of APP in CCL-136 cells (data not shown). In contrast, overexpression of the control antigen OVA did not lead to accumulation of OVA in GFP-Atg8/LC3-labeled autophagosomes after CQ treatment. These data indicate that, unlike OVA, APP is degraded via lysosomal proteolysis after autophagy. 

Fig 1. Amyloid precursor protein (APP) colocalizes with Atg8/light chain (LC3)-positive autophagosomes in cultured human muscle cells. (A) CCL-136 rhabdomyosarcoma cells were stably transfected with the green fluorescent protein (GFP)-Atg8/LC3 reporter construct. To stabilize GFP-Atg8/LC3 in endosomal/lysosomal compartments, we treated cells with 50M chloroquine (CQ) for 10 hours. Cells were fixed, stained for APP, and analyzed by confocal microscopy. Nuclei were visualized by DNA staining with 4Ј,6diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). Representative fields from one experiment of three are shown. Scale bars ϭ 20m. (B) Ovalbumin (OVA) was overexpressed in CCL-136 cells, and its colocalization with GFP-Atg8/LC3 was analyzed after CQ treatment as described in (A). Nuclei were visualized by

Immunohistochemical Detection of Atg8/LC3-Positive Autophagosomes in Sporadic Inclusion Body Myositis Muscle

We next investigated human muscle biopsies from patients with sIBM, myopathies with or without vacuoles, and nonmyopathic muscle for the presence of Atg8/LC3-positive autophagosomes. In an overview of the clinical data together with the biopsy findings, no specific bias for the clinical severity, the duration of symptoms, or the histological findings could be observed in our patient cohort (see the Table ). In serial sections, we compared Atg8/LC3 staining with and without preadsorption (competitive epitope blocking with at least 100-fold excess of the peptide), allowing us to distinguish between specific Atg8/LC3 staining and unspecific staining, as well as tissue autofluorescence. We found that specific Atg8/LC3 staining, blockable by preadsorption, predominantly localized to the sarcoplasm of the muscle fibers, whereas unspecific background staining was mainly confined to connective tissue (Fig 2). In sIBM, the percentage of LC3-positive fibers was 7.2 Ϯ 1.8% (mean Ϯ standard deviation [SD]) with no apparent correlation with the disease duration or severity of the clinical course (see the Table). Staining for Atg8/LC3 was not specific to sIBM and was also present in vacuolated muscle fibers from patients with lysosomal ␣-glucosidase deficiency (M. Pompe; see Fig 2), whereas almost no staining was observed in nonmyopathic and nonvacuolated myopathic muscle.

The morphology of the vesicles was reminiscent of autophagosomes. The Atg8/LC3 signal often either outlined the limiting membrane or even displayed a cup-shaped morphology, characteristic for the isolation membrane of forming autophagosomes (see Fig 2). 10 

Immunohistochemical Colocalization Analysis of Light Chain 3, ␤-Amyloid, and Inflammatory Molecules in Sporadic Inclusion Body Myositis Muscle

To test whether APP/␤-amyloid is a substrate of autophagy in sIBM, we examined the colocalization of Atg8/LC3-positive autophagosomes and ␤-amyloid in sIBM tissue sections by fluorescent double-labeling immunohistochemistry. In degenerating muscle fibers, ␤-amyloid was consistently located in Atg8/LC3positive large vesicular structures (Ն1m) (Fig 3), which was similarly observed in double stainings of all nine sIBM samples. In these autophagosomes, ␤-amyloid was frequently enriched in the center of the vesicles, whereas Atg8/LC3 localized to the limiting membrane. In up to 779 muscle fibers per patient from 5 biopsy samples of sIBM, quantification of double labeling for ␤-amyloid and LC3 demonstrated that 4.6 Ϯ 1.0% (mean Ϯ SD) were positive for ␤-amyloid, and 88.4 Ϯ 15.6% (mean Ϯ SD) of ␤-amyloid-positive fibers were double positive for Atg8/LC3 (data not shown). Consistent with previous observations, 11 accumulation of ␤-amyloid was primarily observed in type II fibers (mean, 92.7 Ϯ 11.9%) (data not shown). These data suggest that APP/

Fig 2. Autophagosomes accumulate in vacuolated muscle fibers of patients with sporadic inclusion body myositis (sIBM). Muscle biopsies from patients with sIBM (both left columns), vacuolar myopathy (Morbus Pompe; second column from the right), and nonmyopathic muscle (right). Staining for hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) shows vacuoles in sIBM and unspecific vacuolar myopathy, but not in nonmyopathic muscle (top row). Serial sections stained for Atg8/LC3 fluorescent immunohistochemistry (Alexa 594, red) without peptide block (middle row) or with light chain 3 (LC3) peptide (bottom row) display a positive staining of vacuoles in

sIBM and vacuolar myopathy. Note that, in contrast with background staining, the specific signal is abolished by preadsorption, and no staining is seen in nonmyopathic muscle. Magnification, 40ϫ objective. Fields representative of nine sIBM samples, two vacuolar myopathy samples, and two nonmyopathic samples are shown. ␤-amyloid is a substrate of autophagy in sIBM, and that a substantial proportion of this protein is targeted for lysosomal degradation after transport by autophagosomes. We could previously show that autophagosomes continuously fuse with multivesicular MHC class II loading compartments, and that antigens targeted into the autophagy pathway are presented to CD4 ϩ T cells via MHC class II. 12,13 To address whether ␤-amyloid and LC3/Atg8-positive muscle fibers in sIBM upregulate MHC class II molecules, we additionally analyzed serial stainings of tissue from sIBM patients for expression of ␤-amyloid, LC3/Atg8, and MHC classes I and II, as well as for infiltration of CD4 ϩ and CD8 ϩ cells by photomicroscopy-aided manual analysis (data not shown). Of the ␤-amyloid positive fibers, 20.3Ϯ 14.8% (mean Ϯ SD) were double positive for MHC class II. All of these also had features of degeneration. Most of the fibers double positive for ␤-amyloid and MHC class II were also positive for Atg8/LC3 (94.4 Ϯ 11.1% [mean Ϯ SD]) and displayed infiltration by CD4 ϩ and CD8 ϩ cells. These data further indicate that ␤-amyloid is an important substrate for autophagy in sIBM and suggest that upregulated autophagy in degenerating muscle fibers might even contribute to antigen processing for MHC class II presentation to CD4 ϩ T cells in the proinflammatory environment of sIBM.

Discussion

Our study provides evidence supporting the involvement of autophagy in the pathogenesis of sIBM. In a human muscle cell line, endogenous APP was targeted to Atg8/LC3-positive autophagosomes. Moreover, in sIBM patients, the frequency of LC3/Atg8-positive autophagosomes was increased in muscle fibers, often associated with the expression of inflammation-associated molecules such as MHC classes I and II or invasion by CD4 ϩ and CD8 ϩ cells. A substantial proportion of intracellular APP/␤-amyloid, colocalized with forming autophagosomes, indicating that ␤-amyloid is targeted for lysosomal degradation via the autophagic pathway.

In sIBM, aggregations of aberrant proteins such as ␤-amyloid in the muscle fibers are a mainstay of the disease pathology. 2 Basal autophagy allows the constitutive removal of cytosolic proteins and organelles in eukaryotic cells and has recently been shown to be essential in preventing neurodegeneration in mice. Animals that lack essential autophagy genes in their central nervous system accumulated diffuse ubiquitinated proteins, as well as inclusion bodies in neuronal cells, and spontaneously developed neurodegenerative disease phenotypes. 6,7 Because the proteasomal function was not altered in these mice, the authors concluded that autophagy assists in the degradation of accumulated intractable proteins when the cellular levels of such proteins overwhelm the disposal capacity of the ubiquitinproteasome system. 7 Therefore, similar to the neurodegenerative disorders of the central nervous system, it is well conceivable that autophagy is a mechanism operational in sIBM, particularly under conditions of overload of the proteasome machinery. 14 Autophagy-mediated degradation of protein aggregates may, however, play an even more important role in skeletal muscle cells than neurons, because muscle fibers already have a high level of constitutive autophagy and were shown to rapidly increase autophagosome numbers after starvation. 3 It is noteworthy in this respect that especially type II (fast-twitching) muscle fibers, which displayed ␤-amyloid-associated degeneration in our samples of sIBM patients, have been shown to be capable of autophagy upregulation upon starvation in GFP-Atg8/LC3 reporter mice. 3 This lends encouraging support for attempts to regulate autophagy in type II muscle fibers for the degradation of accumulations of ␤-amyloid as a potential therapeutic approach in sIBM.

Intracellular accumulation of protein is associated with overload of MHC class I and endoplasmic reticulum stress, which recently has been demonstrated to play a crucial role in inflammatory myopathies including sIBM. 14,15 Several studies implicated autophagic pathways in endogenous MHC antigen processing, and we could recently show that MHC class II loading compartments continuously receive input from autophagosomes in professional antigenpresenting cells, as well as in interferon-␥ activated epithelial cell lines. 12 Although the exact mechanism of this alternative pathway compared with conventional MHC class II antigen processing remains to be determined, 13 the information is relevant to sIBM where the muscle fibers have the properties to behave as antigen-presenting cells. 16 Atg8/LC3-positive autophagic vacuoles were not specific to sIBM, but also occurred in the lysosomal storage disease M. Pompe. Expansion of autophagic vesicles has recently been described in a mouse model of lysosomal acid ␣-glucosidase deficiency. 17 However, colocalization between ␤-amyloid/APP and Atg8/LC3 was not observed in other vacuolated and nonvacuolated myopathies or nonmyopathic control subjects. This double staining is compatible with the finding that autophagic compartments, highly enriched for APP and ␥-secretase complex components, were found in increased numbers in brain biopsies from patients with Alzheimer's disease. 18,19 LC3/Atg8-postive autophagosomes and prelysosomal late autophagic vacuoles accumulated markedly in dystrophic neuronal dendrites and represented a major reservoir of intracellular ␤-amyloid. 19 Lack of autophagosomal content degradation was actually implicated in accumulation of intracellular and extracellular ␤-amyloid plaques, because inhibition of autophagy decreased ␤-amyloid peptide levels. 19 Therefore, aberrant autophagic degradation without efficient breakdown of autophagic cargo in lysosomes might actually exacerbate Alzheimer's disease by generating more ␤-amyloid depositions. Similar mechanisms may well be crucial events during the pathogenesis of sIBM.

Our data indicate that the autophagic pathway is involved in ␤-amyloid-associated degeneration in sIBM muscle and suggest that harnessing the autophagy pathway could have therapeutic merit. However, in addition to its central role in preventing intracellular protein accumulation, induction of autophagy has been associated with various forms of cell death. 20 In exploring the therapeutic potential of autophagy in diseases associated with accumulation of aggregate-prone proteins, it will be essential to better define the signaling pathways either leading to protective autophagy or autophagic cell death.

This work was supported by the Arnold and Mabel Beckman Foundation, the Alexandrine and Alexander Sinsheimer Foundation, the Burroughs Wellcome Fund, the Dana Foundation's Neuroimmunology program, the National Cancer Institute (R01CA108609 and R01CA101741), the NIH (National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, RFP-NIH-NIAID-DAIDS-BAA-06-19), the Foundation for the National Institutes of Health (Grand Challenges in Global Health, C.M.), an Institutional Clinical and Translational Science Award (to the Rockefeller University Hospital), a Dana Foundation and Irvington Institute's Human Immunology Fellowship (U54RR023419, J.D.L.), Pilot Study Funds of the Institutional Clinical and Translational Science Award (to the Rockefeller University Hospital, 1UL1RR024143, J.D.L.), the University of Go ¨ttingen (J.S.), the Association Francaise contre les Myopathies (AFM; AM/NM/2006.1377/12087, J.S.), a predoctoral fellowship from the Schering foundation (D.S.), and the Volkswagen Stiftung (ZN1294, A.W.). We thank A. Brandis for providing muscle specimen and G. Nchinda and K. U ¨berla for providing the OVA-expression construct. We thank T. Young and D. J. Selkoe for providing the APPexpression construct.

Fig 1. Amyloid precursor protein (APP) colocalizes with Atg8/light chain (LC3)-positive autophagosomes in cultured human muscle cells. (A) CCL-136 rhabdomyosarcoma cells were stably transfected with the green fluorescent protein (GFP)-Atg8/LC3 reporter construct. To stabilize GFP-Atg8/LC3 in endosomal/lysosomal compartments, we treated cells with 50M chloroquine (CQ) for 10 hours. Cells were fixed, stained for APP, and analyzed by confocal microscopy. Nuclei were visualized by DNA staining with 4Ј,6diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). Representative fields from one experiment of three are shown. Scale bars ϭ 20m. (B) Ovalbumin (OVA) was overexpressed in CCL-136 cells, and its colocalization with GFP-Atg8/LC3 was analyzed after CQ treatment as described in (A). Nuclei were visualized by DNA staining with DAPI. One representative field from one experiment of three is shown. Scale bars ϭ 20m. RRX ϭ Rhodamine Red-X.

Fig 3 .3Fig 3. Amyloid precursor protein (APP)/␤-amyloid colocalizes with Atg8/light chain 3 (LC3)-positive autophagosomes in degenerated muscle fibers of sporadic inclusion body myositis (sIBM) patients. Conventional histochemistry and fluorescent immunohistochemistry in a representative muscle biopsy from a patient with sIBM. (A) Serial sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) (left) and immunohistochemical staining of APP/␤-amyloid (right; clone 6E10, Alexa 488, green). Large accumulations of␤-amyloid are evident in a small, degenerated muscle fiber. (B) Atg8/LC3 (Alexa 594, red) is localized to vacuoles within myofibers of sIBM. APP/␤-amyloid (clone 6E10, Alexa 488, green) is localized to vacuoles and intracellular protein accumulations. In the overlay, colocalization of Atg8/LC3 and ␤-amyloid is evident in the vacuoles of degenerating fiber (yellow). 4Ј,6-Diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) counterstain in left and middle (blue). Magnification, 40ϫ. Fields representative for nine sIBM samples are shown.

Table . Patients' Characteristics and Overview of Clinical Data of All Patients and Biopsy Results.pressing green fluorescent protein (GFP)-LC3, we cloned thecomplementary DNA of human microtubule-associated pro-Patient tein 1 LC3B sequence (NM_022818) from a human B-LCL Diagnosis Area of Muscle Age Sex DurationSeverity ofFiber Typing byLC3-No. by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction with gene-Biopsy (yr) specific primers into the mammalian expression vector pEGFP-C2 (ClonTech, Mountain View, CA), and sub-of DiseaseClinical CourseATPasePositive Fibers/Total Fibers (%)1 cloned the EGFP-LC3 sequence into the lentiviral vector sIBM Left biceps 62 M 5 yearsModerateType I predominance;111/1,512pHR-SIN-CSGW⌬NotI. For production of lentiviral parti-type II atrophy(7.3)2 cles, lentiviral vectors were cotransfected with helper plas-sIBM Left vastus 64 M SeveralMildType I predominance;19/189medialis mids pCMV⌬R8.91 and pMDG into 293T cells by calciumyearstype II atrophy(10.1)3 phosphate transfection. Culture supernatants were harvested sIBM Right quadriceps 58 M 2 yearsMild to-93/1,943femoris on day 2 after transfection, filtered through a 0.45m filter,moderate(4.8)4 and used for the generation of CCL-136 cell lines, stably sIBM Right biceps 61 F expressing GFP-LC3, at a MOI of 10. An APP-expression18 yearsModerate to severeType I predominance; type II atrophy51/808 (6.3)5 construct was kindly provided by Tracy Young and Denis J. sIBM Right biceps 61 M 5 years Selkoe (Center for Neurologic Diseases, Harvard MedicalSevereType I predominance; type II atrophy65/1,416 (4.6)6 School and Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA). sIBM Right biceps 66 F As a control, an ovalbumin (OVA)-expressing construct, the10 yearsModerate to severeType II atrophy181/1,962 (9.2)7 OVA sequence (NM_205152.1) cloned into the pcDNA 3.1 sIBM Left gastrocnemius 73 M 6 years vector (Invitrogen), was kindly provided by GodwinMild to moderate-16/205 (7.8)8 Nchinda (Rockefeller University, New York, NY) and Klaus sIBM Right biceps 71 F5 yearsModerateType II atrophy70/1,006(7.0)9sIBMLeft biceps70M 6 yearsModerateType II atrophy68/910 (7.5)10NoninflammatoryRight quadriceps44M 11 yearsModerateType II atrophy53/1,540dystrophy(3.4)11NoninflammatoryUnknown45M 20 yearsSevereType I predominance7/715 (1.0)dystrophy12Myopathy withRight deltoideus79F9 monthsModerateType I predominance;205/1,372vacuoles and neu-to severetype II atrophy(14.9)rogenic features13Morbus PompeQuadriceps14M 9 yearsSevereType II predominance;184/559femorisatrophy of type I(32.9)and II14NonmyopathicLeft biceps60F10 yearsMildNormal14/1,122(1.2)15NonmyopathicLeft quadriceps44M 5 yearsMildNormal16/971 (1.6)Because of long-term tissue storage, fiber typing by the adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) reaction was no longer possible in two of themuscle biopsies.LC3 ϭ light chain 3; sIBM ϭ sporadic inclusion body myositis.U ¨berla (University of Bochum, Bochum, Germany).

