Correlation of muscle biopsy, clinical course, and outcome in PM and sporadic IBM

Objective: To correlate muscle biopsy findings with prebiopsy and postbiopsy clinical course and response to therapy in polymyositis (PM) and sporadic inclusion body myositis (IBM).

Background: Existence of pure PM has recently been questioned; subsequently, the definition and criteria for diagnosing PM were debated.

Methods:

Patient records, follow-up information, and muscle biopsies were analyzed in 107 patients whose biopsies were initially read as PM and IBM.

Results:

The patients fell into three groups by combined biopsy and clinical criteria: PM, 27 patients; IBM, 64 patients; PM/IBM, 16 patients with biopsy diagnosis of PM but clinical features of IBM. For the three groups, the respective mean periods from disease onset to end of follow-up were 5.9, 8.5, and 9.6 years. Another autoimmune disease was present in 4 of 27 PM, 8 of 64 IBM, and 1 of 16 PM/IBM cases. An autoimmune serologic marker occurred in one-third of each group. Nineteen PM patients had no associated autoimmune disease or marker. Nonnecrotic fiber invasion by mononuclear cells appeared in all IBM, 17 of 27 PM, and 13 of 16 PM/IBM patients. The density of both invaded fibers and cytochrome-c oxidase-negative fibers was higher in IBM and PM/IBM than in PM. Immunotherapy improved 22 of 27 PM patients but had only transient beneficial effects in 2 of 32 IBM and 1 of 14 PM/IBM patients.

Conclusions: 1) Sixteen of 43 patients (37%) with biopsy features of polymyositis (PM) had clinical features of inclusion body myositis (IBM). 2) Absence of canonical biopsy features of IBM from clinically affected muscles of IBM patients challenges biopsy criteria for IBM, or the IBM markers appear late in some patients, or their distribution in muscle is patchy and restricted compared with that of the inflammatory exudate. 3) The muscle biopsy is a reliable instrument in the diagnosis of PM and IBM in close to 85% of the patients. Errors of diagnosis in the remaining 15% can be avoided or reduced by combined evaluation of the clinical and pathologic findings.

of 28 of 39 patients revealed inflammatory exudates. Nearly one-half of Eaton's patients had cutaneous findings compatible with DM or scleroderma, and two had rheumatoid arthritis. Eaton commented that the term polymyositis was distinguished by the ambiguity surrounding it and proposed reserving it for patients in whom muscle involvement predominates. 2 The clinical heterogeneity of PM and its frequent association with other collagenvascular diseases were also recognized by Walton and Adams 3 and Rowland 4 in 1958, and by Pearson and Rose in 1960. 5 In 1975, Bohan and Peter included dermatomyositis and other collagen-vascular diseases under the rubric of PM. The diagnostic criteria proposed by Bohan and Peter were similar to those used by Eaton but also included elevation of serum enzymes of muscle origin. 6 In the 1970s, after sporadic inclusion body myositis (IBM) had emerged as a clinical and pathologic entity, [7][8][9] it became apparent that previous clinical classifications of inflammatory myopathies were unsatisfactory, because IBM evolved slowly and often involved distal muscles. The pathologic criteria for the diagnosis of PM and IBM were later modified by histologic studies that identified T cell-mediated muscle fiber injury [10][11][12] and by discovery of congophilic deposits in IBM. 13 More recent communications questioned the reliability of pathologic criteria for the diagnosis of IBM because some patients with clinical features of IBM lacked the canonical pathologic features of the disease even on repeated muscle biopsies. [14][15][16] A controversy has recently emerged about the existence of PM as a distinct entity. A retrospective study from The Netherlands analyzed 165 patients who had been diagnosed with myositis between 1977 and 1998 and found that only 5 fulfilled the criteria of pure PM. 17 In this study, the diagnosis of PM was restricted to patients with serum creatine kinase (CK) elevation greater than twice above normal and presence of endomysial mononuclear cells surrounding and preferably invading nonnecrotic muscle fibers. These investigators also excluded patients with unspecified myositis, IBM, rhabdomyolysis, features suggesting muscular dystrophy, incomplete clinical data, or no inflammation in muscle. Of note, the definition of PM in this study was different from previous definitions 2,3,5,6 in that it excluded myositides associated with collagen-vascular diseases or markers. Subsequently, other investigators argued that they would have included cases of "unspecified myositis" under the rubric of PM, 18 that the diagnosis of PM should not depend on the invasion of nonnecrotic muscle fibers by mononuclear cells, 19 that the criteria for the diagnosis of PM are too rigid and have low sensitivity, 20 and that the final diagnosis must weigh the clinical as well as pathologic features. 20 To further investigate the controversial issues described above, we reviewed muscle biopsy findings, prebiopsy and postbiopsy clinical records, and information available by patient contact from patients who had muscle biopsies at the Mayo Clinic between 1998 and 2003 interpreted to show PM or IBM. We asked the following questions: 1) At what frequency are autoimmune diseases or markers present in patients whose muscle biopsies are interpreted to show PM and IBM? 2) Is there a group of patients in whom PM is not associated with another autoimmune disease or marker? 3) Can the muscle biopsy reliably distinguish between PM and IBM? METHODS Patients. Between 1998 and 2003, muscle biopsies of 146 patients were interpreted as showing PM or IBM. Of these patients, 107 were available for follow-up. Information was obtained from patient records and from all patients or their families by a questionnaire regarding the most recent clinical status, therapy received, progression of symptoms, distribution of muscle weakness, response to therapy, and the cause of death if the patient had died. When a response to the questionnaire was ambiguous, the patient or the family was contacted by telephone for clarification. Sixty patients were also reevaluated on return visit. All studies were in accord with the guidelines of the Mayo Institutional Review Board.

Studies of biopsy specimens. Muscle specimens were processed for histochemical analysis as described. 21 The initial muscle biopsies were reviewed independently by the two authors. Assessment of each muscle biopsy included determination of the muscle fiber area, the number of nonnecrotic fibers invaded by mononuclear cells per unit biopsy area, and the number of cytochrome-c oxidase (COX)-negative fibers per unit biopsy area. Biopsy areas were measured digitally in suitably enlarged images.

Criteria for diagnosis.

The clinical and pathologic criteria for PM consisted of 1) subacutely evolving predominantly proximal limb muscle weakness with or without an associated autoimmune disease or marker; 2) compatible EMG findings; 3) an inflammatory exudate present in endomysium, with or without invasion of nonnecrotic muscle fibers by mononuclear cells, and with or without perimysial or perivascular inflammation; and 4) absence of clinical or pathologic features of DM, necrotizing vasculitis, muscular dystrophy, or overlap syndromes with myositis but without endomysial inflammation.

The clinical and pathologic criteria for IBM were 1) slowly evolving muscle weakness with selectively severe involvement of the finger flexor or quadriceps muscles or both, [22][23][24][25] with or without an associated autoimmune disease or marker 24 ; 2) compatible EMG findings 26 ; 3) fibers harboring vacuoles rimmed by membranous material with SMI-31 reactivity of some of the vacuoles 27,28 ; 4) an endomysial inflammatory exudate with invasion of nonnecrotic fibers by mononuclear cells with or without perivascular or perimysial inflammation 10 ; and 5) congophilic deposits within muscle fibers. 13 Using the above criteria, we encountered a third group of patients whose muscle specimens had pathologic features of PM without canonical features of IBM, namely rimmed vacuoles or congophilic deposits, yet had slowly evolving weakness with preferential involvement of the finger flexor and quadriceps muscles. We designated this group as PM/IBM.

Statistics. Means of normally distributed values were com-

pared by the t test; medians of values not normally distributed were compared by the Mann-Whitney rank-sum test. Frequencies of a given observations in different disorders were compared by the Fisher exact probability test. All tests were two-tailed.

RESULTS

Demographics. Twenty-seven PM, 64 IBM, and 16 PM/IBM patients were available for follow-up (table 1). At the time of diagnosis, the mean age of IBM and PM/IBM patients exceeded that of PM patients by approximately a decade. The mean duration of symptoms before biopsy was approximately twice as long for patients with IBM and PM/IBM than for patients with PM. Similarly, the mean total disease duration at the last follow-up was longer for patients with IBM and PM/IBM than for patients with PM. Twice as many women than men were diagnosed with PM or PM/ IBM; conversely, twice as many men than women were diagnosed with IBM. Thus, PM/IBM patients resembled IBM patients in age at onset and mean duration of symptoms before biopsy, but in this small group and unlike in the IBM group, women were significantly more frequently represented than men.

Distribution of weakness.

All PM patients had predominantly proximal limb muscle weakness. In IBM, 55 patients had selectively severe weakness of the quadriceps and finger flexor muscles; 8 had selective weakness of the quadriceps but not of the finger flexors, and 4 of these had developed finger flexors weakness on follow-up. One patient had selective weakness of the finger flexors but not of the quadriceps at the time of diagnosis and on follow-up. In 14 PM/IBM patients, the distribution of weakness from the start of illness resembled that observed in IBM; in 2 PM/IBM patients, selectively severe weakness of the finger flexor and quadriceps muscles became apparent within 2 years after the onset of symptoms. Consistent with previous studies, [29][30][31] mitochondrial abnormalities were frequently present in our patients. COX-negative fibers were detected in muscle specimens of 63 of 64 patients with IBM, 20 of 27 patients with PM, and all 16 cases of PM/IBM. The number of COX-negative fibers was significantly higher in IBM and PM/ IBM than in PM (table 5).

Three PM/IBM patients underwent repeat muscle biopsies of clinically affected muscles so that both distal and proximal muscles were sampled 1, 4, and 6 years after the initial biopsy findings. None of the repeat biopsies showed characteristic histologic features of IBM.

Response to immunotherapy.Twenty-two of 27 patients with PM improved by different modalities of immunotherapy; 2 of 32 with IBM and 1 of 14 with PM/IBM responded transiently to immunotherapy (table 6). The proportion of patients with autoimmune markers or disease responding to immunotherapy did not differ significantly from  that of patients without autoimmune markers or disease. Among the PM patients, responsiveness to immunotherapy was not significantly different according to presence or absence of invaded fibers in their biopsy specimens.

Mortality and association with malignancy. Four PM patients died of causes unrelated to PM. Five IBM patients died: 2 of aspiration pneumonia, 1 of unrelated cause, and 2 of unknown cause. Two PM/IBM patients died; 1 of aspiration pneumonia and 1 of an unrelated cause. None of the three categories of patients investigated in this study had developed a malignancy during or within 2 years preceding the period of observation.

DISCUSSION The present study confirms previously noted demographic, clinical, and pathologic features of IBM as regards age at onset, rate of progression, distribution of weakness, and typical muscle biopsy. 23,25,26,[32][33][34] Our histologic criteria for the diagnosis of PM (endomysial inflammation with or without invasion of nonnecrotic fibers by mononuclear cells and with or without perimysial or perivascular inflammation) were like those proposed by the recent study from The Netherlands, 17 but we did not exclude patients with an associated autoimmune disease or positive test result for an autoimmune serologic marker, or patients with CK elevations less than twice above normal.

Consistent with previous observations, [14][15][16] we encountered a group of 16 PM/IBM patients with clinical features of IBM but with muscle biopsies that lacked rimmed vacuoles or congophilic inclusion, canonical markers for IBM. These biopsy specimens may have lacked IBM features owing to sampling error. However, this seems unlikely because each biopsy specimen was sectioned at multiple levels, and in three patients repeat biopsies 1, 4, and 6 years after the initial biopsy still did not show the canonical IBM markers. The absence of canonical biopsy features of IBM from clinically affected muscles of some IBM patients challenges biopsy criteria for IBM, or the IBM markers appear late in some patients, or their distribution in muscle is patchy and restricted compared with that of the inflammatory exudate.

Our studies indicate that autoimmune diseases associated with PM and IBM are present at a low frequency after a reasonable period of follow-up  (table 4). Autoimmune serologic markers appear in one-third of patients in each group (table 4). The association of PM 5,6,35 and of IBM [36][37][38][39][40][41][42][43][44][45][46] with other autoimmune diseases or autoimmune serologic marker has been previously documented. These findings do not establish that either PM or IBM are facets of another autoimmune disease; instead, they argue for an autoimmune contribution to their pathogenesis. On the basis of our findings, we disagree with the notion that "pure" PM is very rare, or possibly nonexistent, 17 because 19 of our PM patients had no associated autoimmune disease or marker. However, PM is indeed the least frequent entity in the group "idiopathic" inflammatory myopathies that comprise PM, IBM, and DM.

The muscle biopsy findings in our patients indicate that invasion of nonnecrotic fibers by mononuclear cells occurs less frequently in PM than in IBM, where it is always present, and that on the average the frequency of invaded fibers per unit biopsy area are close to four times higher in IBM than in PM. Similarly, 63 of 64 IBM and all PM/IBM but only 20 of 27 PM patients had COXnegative fibers. Also, on average, COX-negative fibers per unit biopsy area were more frequent in IBM and PM/IBM than in PM. These statistics are of no direct help in distinguishing PM from IBM or from PM/IBM with confidence, and do not predict responsiveness to immunotherapy. However, absence of both invaded fibers and COX-negative fibers seems to be strong evidence against IBM or PM/IBM.

The markedly different responsiveness to immunotherapy in PM vs IBM and PM/IBM are in keeping with previous observations in PM and IBM (reviewed in references 24 and 47). That responsiveness to immunotherapy in PM does not correlate with presence or absence of nonnecrotic fibers invaded by mononuclear cells indicates that the autoaggressive inflammatory exudate in and of itself does not portend an unfavorable prognosis.

In the 16 patients with PM/IBM, the biopsy findings did not indicate IBM, but the clinical findings and the clinical course were like those in IBM. Although the muscle biopsy is not infallible for the diagnosis of IBM, it remains important for excluding other possible diagnoses, such as distal muscular dystrophies, myofibrillar myopathies, and neurogenic disorders. Also, as for any muscle disease, the final diagnosis of IBM must rest on combined, clinical, EMG, and pathologic criteria.

Received March 29, 2007. Accepted in final form May 24,  2007   * Therapy in polymyositis (PM), inclusion body myositis (IBM), and PM/IBM consisted of prednisone (25, 25, 12), methotrexate (16, 8, 6), mycophenolate mofetil (10, 3, 2), azathioprine (5, 8, 6), IV immunoglobulin (6, 10, 2), cyclosporin (0, 0, 3), and plasmapheresis (0, 1, 0). Twenty PM, 17 IBM, and 8 PM/IBM patients received more than one modality of immunotherapy. † Proportion of improved patients is higher in PM than in IBM or PM/IBM (p Ͻ 0.001). ‡ Transient improvement.

Table 11Patient material Fourteen patients had clinical features of inclusion body myositis (IBM) before and two after the time of biopsy. † Lower in polymyositis (PM) than in IBM (p Ͻ 0.001) or PM/IBM (p ϭ 0.004). ‡ More women than men in PM/IBM than in IBM (p ϭ 0.02). § Shorter in PM than in IBM (p Ͻ 0.001) or PM/IBM (p ϭ 0.006). Shorter in PM than in IBM or PM/IBM (p Ͻ 0.001). The mean serum CK level at the time of diagnosis was threefold to fourfold higher in PM than in IBM or PM/IBM, and was similar for IBM and PM/IBM (table2). Of note, 4 of 27 patients with PM, 17 of 63 with IBM, and 1 of 16 with PM/IBM had CK levels that fell in the normal range. Moreover, 6 of 27 PM patients had CK elevations less than twofold above the upper limit of normal. Thus, 6 of the PM patients in our series would not have been diagnosed as having PM by the criteria used by the study from The Netherlands.17 PMIBMPM/IBM*Serum CK levels.

Table 22Serum CK levelsPM (27)IBM (64)PM/IBM (16)Mean Ϯ SD2,199 Ϯ 3,078546 Ϯ 571570 Ϯ 383Range50 to 13,25467 to 3,883200 to 1,490Median1,015*402428Patients with normal CK4/2717/631/16* Higher in polymyositis (PM) than in inclusion body myositis (IBM) (p Ͻ 0.001) or PM/IBM (p ϭ 0.034).CK ϭ creatine kinase.

Table 33Association with other autoimmune diseasesPM (27)IBM (64)PM/IBM (16)* Polymyositis (PM) and inclusion body myositis (IBM) frequencies are not significantly different.† One IBM patient had both Hashimoto thyroiditis and celiac disease. MG ϭ myasthenia gravis.

Table 44Association with autoimmune serologic markers (positive test result/patients tested)* More than one marker was detected in some patients. Not all patients were tested for all markers. † Frequencies in polymyositis (PM), inclusion body myositis (IBM), and PM/IBM are not significantly different. ANA ϭ antinuclear antibodies; SSA ϭ Sjo ¨gren syndrome A; SSB ϭ Sjo ¨gren syndrome B; AChR ϭ acetylcholine receptor.PM (27)IBM (64)PM/IBM (16)*

Table 55Muscle biopsy findingsPM (27)IBM (64)PM/IBM (16)No. of patients with nonnecrotic fibers invaded by mononuclear cells*176413Invaded fibers/cm 2 , mean, median †14, 951, 4628, 17No. of patients with COX-negative fibers ‡206316COX-negative fibers/cm 2 , mean, median  §84, 15243, 169251, 91* Frequency higher in inclusion body myositis (IBM) than in polymyositis (PM) (p Ͻ 0.001) or PM/IBM (p ϭ 0.005).† Median higher in IBM than in PM (p Ͻ 0.001) or PM/IBM (p Ͻ 0.001).‡ Frequency higher in IBM (p Ͻ 0.001) and PM/IBM (p Ͻ 0.04) than in PM.§ Median higher in IBM (p Ͻ 0.001) and PM/IBM (p Ͻ 0.005) than in PM. COX ϭ cytochrome-c oxidase.

Table 66Effects of immunotherapy*PM/IBMPM (27)IBM (64)(16)Treated273214Improved †222 ‡1 ‡Stabilized †214Worsened02 89Response not known310Untreated03 22Improved000Stabilized040Worsened02 61Response not known021

