Amyloidosis causing a progressive myopathy

A 62-year-old woman developed profound weakness secondary to a progressive myopathy associated with primary systemic amyloidosis. The characteristic apple-green birefringent amyloid deposits were demonstrated surrounding individual muscle fibers in Congo red stained sections. Electron microscopy demonstrated amyloid filaments in close apposition to muscle fibers exhibiting excessive corrugations of the sarcolemmal membrane. The pathological features of progressive amyloid myopathy associated with primary systemic amyloidosis are distinct from the intracellular amyloid deposits characteristic of sporadic inclusion body myositis and inherited inclusion body myopathy.

General physical examination showed no abnormalities. Visual acuity, optic fundi, extraocular movements, and facial muscles were normal. Neck flexor strength was not antigravity (MRC grade 2).' Muscle weakness was symmetrical in the extremities. In the upper extremities strength was 4in proximal and 4 in distal muscle groups. In the legs, the hip extensors, flexors, and abductors were grade 2. The knee extensors were 3-, ankle dorsiflexors, evertors, and invertors were 4-. Muscle stretch reflexes were depressed. Plantar responses were flexor. All sensory modalities were preserved. all muscles tested (deltoid, biceps, triceps, vastus lateralis, anterior tibialis). Voluntary motor unit potentials were short in duration and low in amplitude. Recruitment was early and there were many polyphasic units. These findings were consistent with a myopathy.

A left biceps muscle biopsy was performed and processed as previously described. ' ' Transverse sections demonstrated scattered regenerating fibers. N o inflammatory cells were seen. The most striking finding was the presence of amyloid surrounding individual muscle fibers observed in Congo red stained sections exhibiting characteristic apple-green birefringence under polarizing light (Fig. 1). Intramuscular blood vessels and motor nerve fascicles were free of amyloid deposits. There were no groups of small angular fibers, no type grouping, and no target fibers. Immune staining of the muscle sections using antibody specifically directed against lambda light chains showed deposits surrounding individual muscle fibers corresponding to the distribution of Congo red deposits. Electron microscopy of the biceps muscle demonstrated excessive sarcolemmal folds (corrugations), some attached to the muscle fiber by a mere thread of apposed sarcolemma virtually devoid of intervening sarcoplasm. Amyloid filaments (1 0-20 nm diameter, nonbranching) were closely intertwined amongst the sarcolemmal corrugations (Fig. 2). A diagnosis of primary systemic amyloidosis (AL) was conferred following a bone marrow biopsy which showed no evidence of plasmacytosis. The bone marrow biopsy demonstrated amyloid deposits.

The patient was followed for 6 months after diagnosis and continued to worsen. Eighteen months after the onset of symptoms she was confined to a wheelchair.

DISCUSSION

Myopathy associated with extracellular amyloid deposits has been described in only 10 pa-

The usual clinical features of amyloid myopathy include: pseudohypertrophy of tients.&10.12-14 excessive sarcolemmal folds (arrows). Some of the sarcolem-ma1 folds are attached to the muscle fiber by a mere thread of apposed sarcolemma devoid of intervening sarcoplasm (arrowheads). Amyloid filaments (10)(11)(12)(13)(14)(15)(16)(17)(18)(19)(20) nm diameter) are closely intertwined amongst the sarcolemmal folds (A). Bar length = 1 pm. muscles, macroglossia, dysphagia, and palpable nodules within the musc1e.6*8-10712-14 In contrast, progressive muscle weakness as the predominant clinical manifestation of amyloid myopathy, as described in the case under discussion, is rare.' Respiratory failure as the presenting manifestation has been described.

All cases of amyloid myopathy have accompanied either primary systemic a m y l o i d ~s i s ' . ~* ~~' ~. ' ' or amyloidosis complicating m y e l ~m a . ~* ' * ' ~

In either instance, malignant or nonmalignant plasma cell dyscrasia, the amyloid is composed of monoclonal light chains (i.e., AL type). In contrast, myopathy as the predominant clinical manifestation has not been reported in secondary (AA) or familial (AF) amyloidosis. These observations suggest that monoclonal light chain (AL)-associated amyloidosis has a greater affinity for skeletal muscle" compared to the aberrant proteins associated with inherited (transthyretin, apolipoprotein A 1, gelsolin) or secondary (serum protein AA) forms of amyloidosis. This relationship has potential diagnostic implications.

The mechanism by which extracellular amyloid causes muscle weakness remains unclear. Amyloid deposits have a known predilection for blood vessels and intramuscular nerves but this was not observed in the case under discussion. Neither was there evidence of denervation atrophy (by either muscle biopsy or EMG) nor muscle fiber necrosis. Instead, amyloid filaments were closely adherent and intertwined with the extracellular matrix surrounding individual muscle fibers (Fig. 2). The highly corrugated appearance of the sarcolemmal membrane raises the possibility that the muscle fibers suffer a mechanical limitation. Alternatively, an electromechanical dissociation may exist.

An important pathological distinction to be emphasized in the discussion at hand is the difference between amyloid deposits in inclusion body myositis (IBM)" and those observed here. Amyloid in IBM is formed intracellularly and accumulates within muscle fibers. In IBM immune staining shows P-amyloid protein, N-and C-terminal epitopes of amyloid precursor protein, ubiquitin, and tau proteins within the vacuolated muscle fib e r ~. ~. ~

The muscle biopsy of the patient under discussion had none of the histological features of IBM; notably absent were rimmed vacuoles, inflammatory infiltrates and intracellular 15-1 8-nm filaments."

FIGURE 2 .2FIGURE 2. Electron micrograph (left biceps muscle) showing

FIGURE 1 .1FIGURE 1. Congo red stained transverse cryostat sections of left biceps muscle showing characteristic apple-green birefringent amyloid deposits around individual muscle fibers. (Magnification ~1 0 0 . )

Table 1 ). Needle EMG of1multiple muscles in the arms and legs demonstrated positive waves and fibrillation potentials inLaboratory Studies. The results of the followingtests were normal: complete blood count, erythro-cyte sedimentation rate, BUN, creatinine, electro-lytes, blood glucose, vitamin B12, antinuclear an-tibody, bilirubin, alanine aminotransferase,aspartate aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase,and urinalysis. The chest radiograph was normalas were the skeletal survey and radioisotope bonescan. A two-dimensional echocardiogram showednormal heart size.A creatinine kinase was mildly elevated at 252U/L (normal < 174 U/L). Serum immunofixationdemonstrated a monoclonal lambda IgC quanti-tated at 396 mg/dL. The 24-h urinary protein was4 gm without demonstrable monoclonal protein orlambda light chains.Electrodiagnostic evaluation revealed normalsensory and motor nerve conduction studies in-cluding sensory nerve action potentials of the me-dian and ulnar nerves (

Table 1 .1Nerve conduction studies of the median and ulnar nervesMotorDL (ms)CV (m/s)DA (PV)~~~~~~~~~Rt Ulnar2 6 ( s 3 4)62 (350)5000 (24000)5000 (24000)26 0 ( s 3 2 0)Rt Median3 0 ( s 4 2)50 (250)4300 (34000)4200 (34000)28 8 (s31 0)SensoryRt Ulnar1 562 (250)11 (210)Rt Median2 451 (350)16 (210)DL = distal latency. CV = conduction velocity, DA = distal amplitude, PA = proximal amplitude Normal values in DafentheSeS

