Common variable immunodeficiency and inclusion body myositis: A distinct myopathy mediated by natural killer cells

been implicated because CD8+ T cells along with macrophages invade nonnecrotic and major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I antigen-expressing muscle fibers C3, 41. A degenerative process also has been proposed on the basis of amyloid deposits, absence of inflammation in some muscle biopsy specimens, and lack of satisfactory response to imrnunotherapies. We report 2 patients with common variable irnrnunodeficiency (CVI), a disorder marked by agammaglobulinernia and immunological abnormalities, in whom IBM developed, and provide evidence that natural killer (NK) cells participate in the muscle fiber injury.

Inclusion body myositis developed in two men, 36 and 48 years old with long-standing common variable immunodeficiency. Immunophenotypic analysis of the endomysial cells showed an increased number of natural killer (NK) cells (defined as CD57+, CD56+, CD3-, CD8-, CD68-) accounting for 8.5 to 9.5% of the total cells, compared with a mean of 1% in sporadic inclusion body myositis. The remaining cells were CD8+, macrophages, and CD4+ T cells. NK cells were positive for intercellular cell adhesion molecule-I and invaded muscle fibers negative for major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I. In contrast to ubiquitous endomysial expression of MHC class I antigen in sporadic inclusion body myositis, the MHC class I in common variable immunodeficiency and inclusion body myositis was absent or weakly expressed in only some of the muscle fibers surrounded by CD8+ cells. Enteroviral or retroviral R N A sequences were not amplified. Treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin improved strength in 1 patient whose repeated muscle biopsy specimen showed normal N K cells. We conclude that inclusion body myositis can develop in patients with common variable immunodeficiency. Common variable immunodeficiency with inclusion body myositis is an immune myopathy mediated by N K cells in a non-MHC class I-restricted cytotoxicity, and by CD8' cells in an MHC class Irestricted process. This is the first description of an inflammatory myopathy in which N K cells participate in the myocytotoxic process.

Dalakas MC, Illa I. Patient 2. a 48-year-old man, presented with a 4-year history of frequent falls, buckling at the knees, and difficulty manipulating fine objects. H e was wearing braces and walked with crutches. Serum creatine kinase (CK) concentration was elevated twofold on one occasion. At the age of 13, he was diagnosed with CVI [ 5 } following recurrent infections. Serum IgG level was 3 1 mgidl; IgA, 5 mgidl; and IgM, 24 mgi dl. H e developed a gluten-sensitive enteropathy that responded to diet, and an ulcerative jejunoileitis that responded to prednisone. On admission, he had atrophy and marked weakness (2-415 MRC scale) in the muscle groups selectively affected in IBM [l-31. Tendon reflexes were trace or absent, and sensation was normal. Serum CK level was normal and aldolase level was 14 unitsiliter (normal, 1-7 unitsiliter). Serum IgG level (while patient was on maintenance monthly dose of 60 gm of IVIg) was normal, IgA was less than 25 mgidl, and IgM was 32 mgidl. The N K cells in the circulation were increased (30%; normal, 8-18"/.

Neither patient demonstrated antibodies against Jo-1, RNP, SM, SSA, SSB, antinuclear antibody, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, coxsackievirus, echovirus, poliovirus, human immunodeficiency virus, or human T-cell lymphotropic virus type I. Electromyography showed active myopathic units. Nerve conduction was normal. Muscle biopsy specimens, two from each patient, showed typical features of IBM characterized by primary endomysial inflammation, numerous red-rimmed vacuoles, amyloid deposits, atrophic fibers, and the typical 15to 18-nm filaments as seen by electron microscopy. Search by polymerase chain reaction for enteroviruses and retroviruses in the RNA extracted from the muscle biopsy specimens and their cultured myotubes was negative.

lmmunocytochemisty and NK Cell Determination

Serial 4-pm fresh-frozen sections of the muscle biopsy specimens were processed for immunocytochemistry using one of the following monoclonal antibodies and biotinylated horse antimouse IgG in an avidin-biotin peroxidase complex, as described [6, 71: anti-CD8, CD4, CD2, CD3, macrophage [Ber-Mac] (CD68), B cells (CD22), MHC class I and 11, NK cells (CD56 and CD57) [8), and $6 T cells. The percentage of each cell subset was calculated as described [6-81.

Single and double immunostaining, in pairs, was performed on serial sections searching for N K cells (defined as CD56+, CD57+, CD3-, CD8-, CD4-, CD68-) and for expression of MHC class I and intercellular cell adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) on the muscle fibers invaded by N K cells, as follows: (a) CD3/CD56, (b) CD8/CD56, (c) CD68/ CD56, (d) CD41CD56, (e) CD571CD56, (f) MHC class I/ CD56, and (g) ICAM-UCD56. For all experiments we followed previously described methods [6-8); for (e) the IgM anti-CD57 antibody was demonstrated with pchain-specific fluorescein-conjugated goat antimouse IgM, while for the IgG anti-CD56 antibody a biotinylated secondary anti-IgG antibody followed by avidin-rhodamine was used. The slides were photographed with fluorescein filters, rhodamine filters, and double exposure.

Disease Control Specimens

Muscle biopsy specimens from 4 patients with sporadic IBM and 3 with polymyositis were processed simultaneously.

Results

The predominant endomysial cells were macrophages (43.5% for Patient 1 and 55.5% for Patient 2), followed by CD8' cells (29.5% and 19.5%) and CD4+ T cells (20% and 18%). N o y/6 T cells were found. B cells accounted for less than 1%. A surprisingly high number of N K cells was noted, accounting for 9.5% 

Treatment and Repeat Biopsy

Patient 1 received IVIg, as described {9, 101, but had no objective improvement. Patient 2 reported no tripping or falls 3 weeks after the first infusion of IVIg. By the second infusion, he stopped using crutches. His deltoid, biceps, and foot extensors improved by one MRC grade. A muscle specimen obtained at repeat biopsy showed unchanged vacuolated fibers but normalization of N K cells from 8.5 to 1 %, with a concomitant increase of CD8+ cells from 19.55 to 37% and reduction of macrophages from 55.5 to 4796. The pattern of MHC class I expression did not change. A reduction of circulating N K cells from 30 to 12% was noted.

Discussion

In the muscles of patients with inflammatory myopathies, the N K cells are rare, not exceeding more than 1% of the total cells [3, 4, 6-81. The abundance of N K cells in the muscles of our patients who had the combination of two rare diseases, CVI and IBM, was unexpected but important because of their capacity to mediate muscle fiber injury. Although the antibodies to CD56 and CD57 could also recognize epitopes on some other T cells 1111, the cells that we called N K cells were CD56+ and CD57+, but CD3-, C D V , CD4-, and CD68-.

In polymyositis and sporadic IBM, autoaggressive CD8+ cells exert cytotoxicity in the context of MHC class I expression which is present on all the muscle fibers {3,4, 12). In CVIABM the MHC class I expression was absent or weakly present in only a few of the fibers surrounded by CD8+ cells. Because NK cellmediated cytotoxicity is antigen independent and not linked to MHC class I { l l , 131, our findings suggest that in CVI/IBM there is a dual mechanism of cytotoxicity, one non-MHC-restricted mediated by N K cells, and the other MHC class I-restricted mediated by CD8' cells. As the N K cell-injured muscle fibers begin to express MHC class I, a CD8+ T cell-mediated autoimmune process follows. Because toxicity by N K cells is inversely proportional to the level of MHC class I expression, the N K cell-mediated myocytotoxicity may become restrained as the MHC class I expression is upregulated. Inflammatory myopathies, therefore, can be mediated by all three types of cytotoxic cells:

CD8+ {4], $6 [14], and NK cells. Our observations support in vitro studies showing a susceptibility of human myotubes to destruction by allospecific NK cells U5l.

The mechanism by which N K cells adhere to the muscle fibers is unclear. A homotypic interaction between the CD56 (N-CAM) molecule expressed by both N K cells and regenerating muscle fibers [8] is unlikely because N K cells were also found within CD56-fibers (see Fig 3). Further, the majority of the A muscle fiber dually immunostained for NK cells with antibodies against CD57 (A) and CD56 (B) shows that the same cells are stained with both CD57 and CD56. (C) Double exposure shows that both of these antibodies recognize the same NK cells. (B) Some ofthe small muscle fibers are CD56+ because this antibody recognizes muscle neural-cell adhesion molecule {8}. Serial sections of the same muscle Jiber ( 0 -F ) dually stained with CD56 (0) and CD8 (E) show that the two cells within the muscle fiber are CD56+ but CD8-, as confirmed with the double exposure (F). ( x 475 before 25% reduction.) Pig 2. Serial sections of a muscle fiber stained Jor NK (CD56) cells (A), CD8 cells (Bj,macrophages (Cj,CD4 cells (D), intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-I) (E), and MHC class I (F). The three cells that have invaded the muscle fiber are NK cells (A). There are rare CD8+ cells (B) and macrophages (C) that do not appear to invade the muscle fiber. Further, the muscle fiber is negative for MHC class I (F). Within and around the muscle fiber invaded by the NK cells there are areas positive for ICAM-1 (E). ( X 575 before 26% reduction.) (G) A larger area of the muscle stainedfor MHC class I shows that the majority of the infiltrates and endothelial cells are positive for MHC clau 1; only a few muscle fibers in certain regions express MHC class I . ( X 375 before 50% reduction.) F i g 3. Serial section of a muscle fiber stained for NK (CD56) cells (A), CD8 cells (B), CD4 cells (C), and macrophages (CD68) (0). The muscle fiber is invaded exclusively by NK cells; the fiber is CD56-. ( X 750 before 24% reduction.) CD56+ regenerating fibers were not invaded by N K cells, allowing the muscle fibers to regenerate, as proposed {ls]. N K cells may attach to CD56targets via leukocyte function-associated antigen (LFA)-l/ ICAM-1 interaction. Our finding of ICAM-1 expression on the regions of the muscle fibers invaded by N K cells and the observation that circulating T cells in some CVI patients express increased phenotypic markers for CD56 and ICAM-1 1161 suggest that NK cells may use ICAM-1 as their ligand to invade the muscle.

CVI is a disease of abnormal immunoregulation in which up to 205% of the patients develop one or more autoimmune diseases 151. Because at least 15% of IBM patients may have autoimmune phenomena [l-31, the present findings support an association beween IBM and autoimmunity. In one of our patients IVIg improved the strength and normalized the endomysial N K cells. This supports the observation that N K cells can exert a myocytotoxic effect and is consistent with the known effect of IVIg to suppress NK cell function. Interestingly, some CVI patients with autoimmune hemolytic anemia have also responded to IVIg 151. 

(Patient 1) and 8.5% (Patient 2) of all the cells counted. The cells were identified as NK because they were CD56+, CD57+, CD3-, C D K , CD4-, CD68-, as confirmed with dual immunostaining (Figs 1, 3). N K cells were the only cells invading muscle fibers in the absence of MHC class 1 but in connection with ICAM-1 (Fig 2A-F). MHC class I was expressed in only a few scattered fibers (Fig 2G), especially those invaded by CD8' cells (not shown). In contrast, in sporadic IBM all the muscle fibers expressed MHC class I (not shown), while N K cells accounted for less than 1% of the total cells.

Fig 1.Fig 1.A muscle fiber dually immunostained for NK cells with antibodies against CD57 (A) and CD56(B)  shows that the same cells are stained with both CD57 and CD56.(C) Double exposure shows that both of these antibodies recognize the same NK cells. (B) Some ofthe small muscle fibers are CD56+ because this antibody recognizes muscle neural-cell adhesion molecule {8}. Serial sections of the same muscle Jiber ( 0 -F ) dually

Dr Ilia was supported by a grant (SAF9210228) from the Comisi6n Interministerial de Ciencia y Technologia, Spain. Brief Communication: Dalakas and Illa: Common Variable Immunodeficiency and IBM 805) 15318249, 1995, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ana.410370615 by University Of Illinois At Urbana Champaign, Wiley Online Library on [13/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

