Idiopathic inflammatory myopathies: inclusion-body myositis, polymyositis, and dermatomyositis

In this review, the main emphasis is on new advances concerning sporadic inclusion-body myositis and hereditary inclusion-body myopathy. Polymyositis and dermatomyositis are reviewed briefly. Hypotheses are presented regarding the possible cause and significance of abnormally accumulated -amyloid protein, two other epitopes of -amyloid precursor protein, hyperphosphorylated 't, a.1-antichymotrypsin, ubiquitin, and prion protein in sporadic inclusion-body myositis and hereditary inclusion-body myopathy. Because most of those proteins are also accumulated at the neuromuscular junction, "junctionalization" of other muscle fiber nuclei is a possibility. Attention is given to the fact that vacuolated muscle fibers in hereditary inclusion-body myopathy may represent early changes because they are virtually free of congophilic amyloid deposit but, like sporadic inclusion-body myositis, contain large accumulations of 13-amyloid protein and prion.

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis and hereditary inclusion-body myopathy

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-lBM) is the most common muscle disease beginning in patients 50 years of age and older [2,4•,S,6•]. Predominantly in men, distal and proximal muscle weakness is present. There is a characteristic thinning of the forearms, which is associated with weakness of the finger extensors, flexors, or both, and prominent involvement of the quadriceps. The slowly progressive course usually leads to severe disability and eventually to respiratory muscle weakness. Dysphagia is fairly common; it can appear during the muscle weakness or precede it [7]. In older patients with dysphagia, IBM should be in the differential diagnosis.

Even though patients often show poor or no response to prednisone and other immunosuppressive treatments, in our experience occasional patients have significant improvement with prednisone (20 to 60 mg as a single dose on alternate days), oral cyclophosphamide (2 mg/kg/d) or total-body irradiation (Engel and Askanas, Unpublished data). This benefit can persist for 6 months to 5 years (and sometimes longer), but normal strength is not restored. Similar benefit was recently reported by others [8,9], but drug doses and duration of improvement were not stated in one report [9). Treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin was reported to be beneficial in three of four s-IBM patients [10]; however, this finding was not confirmed by another trial in seven patients [11].

The light microscopic pathologic features of s-IBM include degrees of mononuclear cell inflammation that vary from abundant in the early stages to little or none in the later stages; muscle fibers with one or several irregular vacuoles that are usually red rimmed (on Engel-Gomori trichrome staining [12]), which are more common in the middle and later stages; and atrophic angu-

Abbreviations

Al}-P-amyloid protein; PAPP-p-amyloid precursor protein; h-lBM-hereditary inclusion-body myopathy; IBM-inclusion-body myositis; mRNA-messenger RNA; s-lBM-sporadic inclusion-body myositis.

lar muscle fibers, which are histochemically dark with panesterase and NADH-tetrazolium reductase reactions and considered to be indicative of a denervation component [4•]. The inflammatory cells are similar to those in polymyositis, being mainly CDS+ cytotoxic T cells (3.. ,13). In both diseases, macrophages comprise approximately 20% to 30%, of the cells surrounding or invading nonnecrotic muscle fibers; within necrotic fibers, they make up 80% of the invading cells 113).

Because red-rimmed vacuoles are sometimes present in only a few muscle fibers and can be very small, s-IBM, especially in its early stages, can be difficult to distinguish from polymyositis by routine histochemistry. In general, s-IBM is probably underdiagnosed, more so in some countries 114). To help differentiate s-IBM from polymyositis by light microscopy of freshfrozen sections, we suggest 1) Engel-Gomori trichrome staining for red-rimmed vacuoles; 2) fluorescence-enhanced Congo red 115.. ) or crystal-violet staining for small bits of amyloid within some vacuolated fibers; 3) alkaline phosphatase staining for connective tissue (typically negative or low in s-IBM but usually prominent in polymyositis) (Askanas and Engel, Unpublished data); and 4) immunocytochemical staining for ubiquitin, for which commercial antibody can be used 116).

The ultrastructural diagnostic criterion for s-IBM is the presence of cytoplasmic "twisted tubulofilaments" of 15 to 21 nm in external diameter 

Hereditary inclusion-body myopathy

Hereditary inclusion-body myopathy (h-IBM) is included in this review because it has striking morphochemical phenotype similarities to s-IBM, as described later. h-IBM is inherited either as an autosomal recessive or an autosomal dominant trait 14   

Unusual aspects of sporadic inclusion-body myositis and hereditary inclusion-body myopathy pathology

Speculations on the pathogenesis

Considerations about the as yet uncertain pathogenesis of s-IBM and h-IBM include the following two general possibilities. The first is that one "master gene" is activated, which in tum directly or indirectly activates the genes for all the accumulated proteins. The master gene could also diminish genetic expression of an enzyme or other factor important in protein disposal to enhance further the accumulation of the characteristic proteins. The master gene could be switched on (or a gene inhibiting it could be switched ofO in s-IBM by an environmental factor, such as a virus, and in h-IBM by the inherited abnormality.

The second possibility is that one protein is accumulated first because of excessive synthesis (excessive synthesis, ie, excessive mRNA, is known for PAPP [43••] and prion [Sarkozi et al., Unpublished data)), decreased disposal, or both. Accumulation of this first protein leads, in some manner, to accumulation of the others, perhaps by the first protein's 1) acting as a transcription-activating factor for them via a common enhancer or promoter region on their genes, 2) binding to them (eg, apolipoprotein E and t are known to bind to AP tn vitro [47,481) or 3) impairing their catabolism.

The postsynaptic neuromuscular junction of a normal innervated mature muscle fiber is a morphologically and chemically specialized region induced, directly or indirectly, by the influence of the innervating motor neuron axon tips. At the human neuromuscular junction, there is a persistent normal accumulation of proteins that are abnormally accumulated in s-IBM and h-IBM, ie, PAPP [49), prion [SO•], <X1-antichymotrypsin [51), apolipoprotein E [52), fibroblast growth factor (37), transforming growth factor-P [42), ubiquitin (531, and the well-known nicotinic acetylcholine receptor and its 43-kD protein. Accumulation of PAPP mRNA is also increased at the neuromuscular junction [43.. l. Nonjunctional regions of mature human innervated fibers do not have accumulation of these proteins. At the normal neuromuscular junction some, or possibly all, of the characteristic "junctional proteins" are presumably continually synthesized under the influence of their activated genes in the special "junctional nuclei" of the muscle fiber. We propose that the orchestrated synthesis of the junctional proteins could be due to the persistent exuberant action (within the junctional muscle nuclei) of either a) a putative master gene conducting "junctionalization," and/orb) a "junctionalizing enhancer/promoter region" common to genes of the accumulated junctional proteins. In s-lBM and h-IBM, the accumulation of junctional proteins in nonjunctional regions of vaculoated muscle fibers could be caused by a similar exuberance of that master gene (or enhancer/promoter region) being provoked in nonjunctional nuclei, ie, a junctionalization of them by an environmental (eg, viral) or hereditary factor mimicking the action of the still unidentified neurogenic junctionalizing influence at the neuromuscular junction.

In regenerating human muscle fibers, a similar increase in the levels of some of the IBM proteins occurs, but to a lesser degree and in a more homogeneous pattern. This increase may be provoked by a partially similar gene activation mechanism. For example, in nonjunctional regions of human regenerating muscle fibers in vivo, PAPP immunoreactivity is expressed moderately, in a diffuse pattern (54) (unlike the strong multifocal pattern in IBM vacuolated muscle fibers). The accumulation of PAPP mRNA is also increased in these regenerating fibers [54,551, and PAPP mRNA is present in human myotubes in tissue culture, where it becomes downregulated during their development [551.

Neuromuscular diseases: muscle

Neuropathy in sporadic inclusion-body myositis and hereditary inclusion-body myopathy

Transverse sections of every s-IBM and h-IBM biopsy specimen contain small angular muscle fibers that have dark staining with panesterase and NADH-tetrazolium reductase reactions and are considered to be indicative of denervation (4•,56); on electromyography, some patients have a neurogenic pattern 157) (any denervation of muscle fibers can result from a neurogenic or myogenous process [58)). In h-lBM, the histochemical evidence of denervation sometimes vastly predominates over vacuolated fibers or other definitely myopathic features (Engel and Askanas, Unpublished data), such that we are tempted to call it "hereditary inclusionbody myopathy-neuropathy." In s-IBM, we propose that the neuropathic component may fail to respond to immunosuppression.

Possible relevance to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease

Because the same proteins that accumulate within the s-IBM and h-IBM muscle fibers accumulate in the brain in sporadic and hereditary Alzheimers's disease, the muscle diseases might have pathogenic analogies to Alzheimer's disease, and knowledge of one might help to elucidate the other. Within each organ disease group, the sporadic and hereditary forms are morphochemical phenocopies of each other. Between the two muscle and brain disease groups, perhaps the sporadic diseases involve parallel pathogenic mechanisms (possibly provoked by a viral process, an autoimmune process, or both) and the two hereditary subgroups involve similar mechanisms eventuating in the accumulated proteins.

One protein, prion, is not accumulated in the brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease but it is in the brains of patients with sporadic and hereditary prion diseases [591. In the prion brain diseases, the level of prion mRNA is not increased; instead, a unique non-mRNA mechanism of prion accumulation has been proposed [591. The muscle fibers of the IBMs are different from those of the prion brain diseases because they do have increased mRNA accumulation, suggesting that their increased level of prion protein is related to exuberance of the normal mRNA mechanisms of prion accumulation, which occurs normally in muscle fibers at neuromuscular junctions and during regeneration (Askanas et al., Unpublished data).

Polymyositis

Clinical and pathologic considerations

Polymyositis is usually a sporadic disease that affects women more commonly than men (1,2,3 Therefore, to monitor the status of the liver, we routinely also measure levels of serum y-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGTP) because it reflects leakage from the liver but not muscle.) In polymyositis, electromyography shows a pattern of brief duration, small-amplitude, overly abundant motor unit action potentials that are often polyphasic [60), with some fibrillations. Diagnostic histochemical features of the muscle biopsy specimen include various degrees of muscle fiber necrosis and regeneration; perivascular and endomysial mononuclear cell infiltration; and increased amounts of endomysial and perimysial connective tissue, which typically is very positive with alkaline phosphatase [58).

(Normally connective tissue is alkaline phosphatase negative, as it can be very early in polymyositis.) This alkaline phosphatase positivity probably reflects activated or proliferating fibroblasts. It is greater than in other myopathies with proliferated connective tissue, such as Duchenne's muscular dystrophy, which usually contains no or very little alkaline phosphatase positivity. We suspect that the amount of connective tissue alkaline phosphatase positivity in polymyositis and in dermatomyositis reflects the more rapid pace of fibroblast proliferation. Immunosuppressive treatment can rapidly reduce or eliminate inflammatory cells in polymyositis muscle biopsy specimens, but not their alkaline phosphatase positivity. Alkaline phosphatase positivity is also a feature of some activated/regenerative muscle fibers [61); however, it is not diagnostic because it is seen in regenerative fibers of any neuromuscular disease [61). Thus, regenerative/proliferative properties of both muscle fibers and fibroblasts are associated with alkaline phosphatase positivity.

Muscle biopsy immunopathology

The mononuclear cell infiltrates in polymyositis muscle biopsy specimens consist of T cells, macrophages, and to a lesser degree, B cells. 

Autoantibodies

Various circulating autoantibodies were reported in polymyositis 13 Antibodies against a signal recognition particle also occur in a few polymyositis patients who have a disease that is very severe and responds poorly to treatment 1721. No evidence indicates a direct pathogenic role of the circulating antibodies in polymyositis 171]; they may represent epiphenomena [1).

Summary

In summary, idiopathic polymyositis is an immune-mediated disorder of unknown cause. The factors that induce inflammatory response in the muscle tissue need to be identified. It is not known whether an altered muscle fiber itself instigates the inflammatory response

Clinical and pathologic considerations

Adult dermatomyositis is more prevalent in women.

A reddish or purplish skin rash often precedes muscle weakness. Dermatomyositis is sometimes associated with systemic sclerosis, mixed connective tissue disease, other systemic autoimmune diseases, and occasionally malignancies 11,3-J. Conversely, all 12 biopsied patients with lupus erythematosus had inflammatory myopathy histochemically typical of dermatomyositis 1741.

Muscle biopsy immunopathology

Mononuclear cell inflammation is often present in the dermatomyositis muscle biopsy specimen. Its degree varies among patients, and some very weak, untreated patients have virtually no inflammation 13.. ,741. Relatively few muscle fibers are surrounded or invaded by lymphocytes, which are mainly in the interstitial and perivascular areas. Unlike in polymyositis, the infiltrates contains a high proportion of B cells and CD4+ T cells 13.. J. Histochemically delineated perifascicular muscle fiber atrophy, involving both type I and type II muscle fibers, is a characteristic morphologic feature of dermatomyositis but is also seen in scleroderma 174) and lupus erythematosus 174). Alkaline phosphatase positivity of the connective tissue can also be prominent in dermatomyositis muscle.

The treatment of dermatomyositis has been summarized elsewhere (1,3.. ,73). Recently, intravenous immunoglobulin has been reported to be beneficial 175•], but one would like to find a less expensive longterm treatment. Intravenous immunoglobulin treatment does, however, raise interesting points about the possible mechanisms of benefit 175•].

Because angiopathy is well established in dermatomyositis muscle, dermatomyositis has been considered a primary vascular disease. The accumulation of complement, mainly C3, in muscle capillaries may be the earliest abnormality in dermatomyositis; it is usually followed by the involvement of the larger blood vessels (1,3.. ,76,771. Immune-mediated intramuscular an-

Neuromuscular diseases: muscle

giopathy is considered to be responsible for capillary thickening, stenosis, and loss, causing ischemia that results in muscle fiber necrosis and perifascicular atrophy. Deposits of IgG and IgM in muscle blood vessels are common [1,3.. ,76,77], but the factors leading to complement activation and to complement and immunoglobulin deposition are not known. Although a humoral immune response directed against intramuscular blood vessels appears to play the important role in the pathogenesis of dermatomyositis, it is not yet known why the blood vessels of the muscles and skin are selectively targeted. Are these blood vessels "innocent bystander" victims of a humeral antibody attack intended for something else, such as a virus or bacterium not in vessels (eg, due to a shared antigen)? Or have some muscle or skin blood vessels been made "foreign" by an exogenous influence, making the ensuing humeral attack on them "normal"? When the first pathogenic steps are learned, more rational treatment might be devised.

Conclusions

Even though s-lBM, polymyositis, and dermatomyositis have various degrees of mononuclear cell inflammation in muscle biopsy specimens, the pathogenesis of each may be different. All three seem to have a dysimmune pathogenesis, possibly are of viral etiology, and probably involve genetic susceptibility factors of the patients. As more insight is gained into the molecular biology of each pathogenesis and etiology, better treatments should be able to be devised.

, and those of very advanced age 130,311; in these conditions, abnormal accumulation of AP is considered to be partially due to increased generation of PAPP and partly to abnormal processing of it 130,311.) Because injected ubiquitin was reported to induce amyloidogenesis 1321, it is of interest whether the increased ubiquitin in s-lBM and h-lBM muscle fibers 1331 can enhance amyloid deposits there.Whereas some of the Congophilic amyloid deposits are located deep within the muscle fiber, others are subjacent to the plasmalemma, and some appear to have come out of the muscle fiber 14•). None of our 12 patients with several other vacuolar myopathies, including acid-maltase deficiency, hypokalemic periodic paralysis, and undefined types, had Congophilic amyloid deposits. As in s-lBM, abnormal muscle fibers in some of these disorders can have increased acid phos-I, and prion protein messenger RNA(Sarkozi et al., Unpublished data) are also increased within vacuolated s-IBM and h-IBM muscle fibers, indicating that the abnormal accumulation of the corresponding proteins is caused, at least partly, by locally increased generation.In both s-IBM and h-IBM vacuolated muscle fibers,prion, PAPP, apolipoprotein E, ubiquitin, fibroblastgrowth factor, transforming growth factor-P, and a.1-an-tichymotrypsin are abundantly present. In h-IBM, hy-perphosphorylated t is present in only 24% of the vac-uolated muscle fibers that are immunoreactive with theother excessive proteins {17.. ). Thus, paucity of bothCongophilic amyloid and hyperphosphorylated t in theh-IBM vacuolated muscle fibers is a subtle quantitativedistinction from s-IBM. In our h-IBM patients, double-fluorescence studies revealed some vacuolated mus-cle fibers that were AP immunoreactive but Congo rednegative 117.. ,291; we conclude that in these fibers,Intracellular amyloid depositsAmyloid denotes the physical configuration of any pro-tein aggregated in P-pleated sheets that stains withCongo red (ie, is Congophilic) and is metachromat-Ultrastructural localizationsically pink with crystal-violet. A number of different Gold immunolocalization of the characteristic proteins, including the P-amyloid protein (AP) part of Alzheimer proteins and prion protein in vacuolated P-amyloid precursor protein (PAPP), have the propen-IBM muscle fibers (Table 1) strikingly resembles their sity to self-aggregate in this way. Congo red-positive localization in abnormal brain. First, as in Alzheimer's amyloid was demonstrated in vacuolated IBM mus-brain, AP is immunolocalized to 6-to 10-nm amyloid-cle fibers by Mendell et al. 127), and we confirmed like fibrils, amorphous structures, and flocculomem-this finding with thioflavin S and crystal-violet stain-branous material, in each of which it closely colo-ing 128,29). Our new method of fluorescence-enhanced calizes with ubiquitin; C-and N-terminal epitopes ofCongo red positivity 115.. 1, which enables identification PAPP are present on amorphous structures and floc-of even very tiny amyloid deposits, reveals amyloid in culomembranous material but not on the 6-to 10-nmvirtually 100% of s-IBM vacuolated fibers 115.. ,17.. ). fibrils (51. However, the intracellular paired helical fila-However, fluorescence-enhanced Congo red positivity ments, in both IBM muscle and brain, do not containof the vacuolated fibers occurs in only 30% of our pa-either PAPP or AP immunoreactivity [1<)-•,29,45). Sec-tients with autosomal recessive h-IBM (and in them, in ond, hyperphosphorylated t is present only in paiJ'ed only 30% to 400/4 of their vacuolated fibers) 14•,17••]. helical filaments It7••], and third, apolipoprotein E isUnresolved questions about the Congophilic amyloid present mainly on paired helical filaments (36•).in s-IBM relate to its chemical nature and origin, the Prion protein is localized to paired helical filaments type of subcellular structure containing it, and its ini-flocculomembranous and amorphous structures, and tial location in the muscle fiber. In IBM muscle fiber, the Congophilic amyloid might or might not be par-tially due to APl28,29), which is a 39-to 42-residue the 6-and 10-nm amyloid-like fibrils (where it colocal-izes with Al3) 134-J.polypeptide part of PAPP 1301. (AP is the major com-ponent of amyloid fibrils in blood vessels and senileplaques in the brain of Alzheimer's disease, Down's syndrome, Dutch hereditary cerebrovascular amyloido-sisphatase staining indicative of increased lysosomal activity, and this increased staining is very prominent in acid-maltase deficiency. Because such biopsy specimens do not have Congophilic amyloid, it is unlikely that the amyloid deposits in s-lBM result from a nonspecific disturbance of lysosomal function. In our experience to date, the only non-IBM muscle disorder with intramyofiber Congophilia is oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy, in which we found it in two of two patients (Unpublished data). Abnormal muscle fibers in oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy can also have increased ubiquitin deposition 1331. Whether intramyofiber Congophilia will be convincingly demonstrated in any other muscle disease remains to be seen.Abnormal accumulation of characteristic Alzheimer proteins and prionWithin the vacuolated muscle fibers of s-lBM and h-IBM, we have identified abnormal accumulations of prion protein[34.. ] and several proteins typically accumulated in the brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease, ie, AP 128,291, N-and C-terminal epitopes of PAPP[19.. I, cx.i-antichymotrypsin 135•1, hyperphosphorylated tll 7.. 1, apolipoprotein E 136•1, fibroblast growth factor (371, and ubiquitin {10,331. The accumulation of ubiquitin[38,391 and PAPP 138,40) in S-IBM fibers has been confirmed by others. Nicotinic acetykholine receptor, its 43-kD associated protein(41), and transforming growth factor-P (42) are also abnormally accumulated in IBM vacuolated muscle fibers. The total ensemble of proteins that we have found to be accumulated excessively in s-IBM and h-IBM muscle fibers appears to be unique for these diseases in our experience to date. We cannot be certain whether this will remain true as more muscle diseases are studied in similar detail. In oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy, two of the proteins are accumulated, ubiquitin 133,381 and PAPP 1401 (Askanas et al., Unpublished data). Levels of PAPP messenger RNA, (mRNA) encoding PAPP containing the Kunitz-type proteinase inhibitor sequence 143.. AP is not in P-pleated sheets (as is the case with AP in Congo red negative diffuse plaques of Alzheimer's brain disease 144).) Perhaps these h-IBM fibers are in an earlier stage of the pathologic process (as was also suggested for Alzheimer's diffuse plaques). Two other speculations are 1) that when the t epitope known to be in IBM paired helical filaments[17••]  is antigenically intact and in a configuration that is immunohistochemically demonstrable with the antibody, it might be at least partly responsible for Congophilia and 2) that AP accumulation in the p-pleated sheet configuration might lead to induction of the hyperphosphorylated t antigenic material. Moreover, nicotinic acetylcholine receptor is localized to paired helical filaments arid to paired helical filaments and to flocculomembranous and amorphous structures, but the 43-kD protein.•is strongly localized to paired helical filaments only [4l'] (Table1).

Table 1 .1Subcellular localization of P-amyloid precursor protein epitopes, ubiquitin, prion, hyperphosphorylated t, n-acetyld1oline receptor, and 43-kD Denotes presence of the element and (-) denotes absence.IIAPP-P-amyloid precursor protein.When autosomal recessive Persian Jewish h-IBM muscle is cultured aneurally, it expresses a partial IBM phenotype, in the form of vacuoles and increased PAPP accumulation (Askanas and Mcferrin, Unpublished data). When innervated by motor neurons from cocultured fetal rat spinal cord to produce rather well differentiated muscle fibers, h-IBM fibers from two other patients showed even more of the IBM phenotype, ie,protein in inclusion-body myositis muscleNicotinic13-AmyloidN-terminalC-terminalHyperphos-acetylcholine43-kDStructureproteinj3APP epitope j3APP epitope Ubiquitin Prion phorylated t Apolipoprotein EreceptorproteinPaired helical filaments 6-to 10-nm amyloid-like fibrils Amorphous structures Floculomembranous material-+ + +--+ +--+ ++ + + ++ + + ++ ---+ +/-+/-+/-+ -+/-+/-+ ---(+) Tissue culture of hereditary inclusion-bodymyopathy musclepaired helical filaments[26,461.  Because these characteristic features have been reproduced in cultured h-IBM muscle, this culture model can provide genetically and morphologically abnormal living tissue that is readily accessible for a wide range of molecular studies, including gene transfer (to date, we have transferred three different genes in an adenovirus vector to our cultured human muscle fibers).

Polymyositis usually causes symmetric proximal muscle weakness, sometimes associated with muscle pain and tenderness. Rarely, polymyositis can be accentuated focally, eg, as forearm swelling and soreness.Without treatment, the disease is progressive, oftenleading to severe disability. Respiratory failure can oc-cur due to respiratory muscle weakness and sometimespulmonary fibrosis. The serum creatine kinase level iselevated and reflects leakage from only skeletal mus-cle fibers or heart, and creatine kinase-MB elevationcan reflect leakage from regenerating skeletal musclefibers or heart. (Elevations in the levels of the serumenzymes aspartate aminotransferase (SGOU, alanineaminotransferase (SGPU, and lactate dehydrogenase(LDH) are not organ specific-they can reflect leak-age from skeletal muscle, heart, or liver cells.••). Occasionally, more than one case occurs within a family, and other autoimmune disorders are not unusual among relatives 13.. ).

