

Using as the cut-off value the upper reference limit of 31 U/L at 37&deg;C (based on young healthy men and women), we obtained a sensitivity and specificity from the admission sample of 51% and 85%, respectively, for all 106 patients. With cut-off values that used the multiples 1 -7 and 2-0 of the upper reference limit, sensitivity dropped to 29% and 25%, respectively-but with a specificity of 100%. Maintaining these cut-off values to eliminate all false positives, sensitivities for the respective periods 0-3-9 h (number of AMI positive cases, 39), 4-5-9 h (17), and 6-8 h (14) were calculated as 3%, 47%, and 57% for the 1-7 multiple, and 3%, 33%, and 50% for the 2-0 multiple. Specificities for a given cut-off value are fairly constant with time.3

With the 2-0 multiple and the non-discriminatory assay for CK-MB activity (rather than mass concentration) a definitive diagnosis of myocardial infarction was established in a third of patients admitted after 4-5-9 h and in half of patients admitted after 6-8 h. If the use of this multiple were combined with one of the newer markers, an early definitive diagnosis might prove to be possible in most AMI cases.

SiR-Apolipoprotein E (apoE) has recently been linked to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease: it is localised immunocytochemically in senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles,1,2 it binds to P-amyloid protein in vitro,z3 and an increased frequency of its 64 allele is associated with late-onset familial and sporadic Alzheimer's disease. 4  Sporadic inclusion-body myositis is a common, progressive disease of muscle of unknown pathogenesis. Muscle specimens have various degrees of inflammation, vacuolated muscle fibres, and, within the vacuoles, twisted tubulofilaments that closely resemble paired-helical filaments seen in brains of those with Alzheimer's disease and in their hyperphosphorylated tazu protein.6 Also, like the Alzheimer brain, vacuolated muscle fibres contain accumulations of p-amyloid protein, al-antichymotrypsin, and ubiquitin, and are Congo-red positive, which suggests amyloid.s

Autosomal-recessive inclusion-body myopathy pathologically closely resembles sporadic inclusion-body myositis, except that there is no inflammation and virtually no Congo- red positivity.s The P-amyloid-positive but Congo-rednegative intracellular inclusions are therefore like the extracellular diffuse plaques in the Alzheimer brain and may represent early change. S  We have now studied 12 patients with sporadic inclusion- body myositis and 6 with hereditary inclusion-body myopathy, all of whom had, in about 80% of their vacuolated muscle fibres, strongly immunoreactive apoE inclusions (figure) with two well-characterised and two commercial (Chemicon, Cortex) antibodies. These sites of apoE positivity co-localised with P-amyloid immunoreactivity on light microscopy. By gold Figure : Muscle specimens from patients with sporadic Inclusion-body myositis (above left and below) and hereditary Inclusion-body myopathy (above right) Immunofluorescence staining of transverse sections show positive apoE deposits (white regions) in 1 abnormal muscle fibre (upper left) and in 3 muscle fibres (upper right), x 1300. Gold immunoelectronmicroscopy (below) shows accumulation of 5 nm gold particles identifying apoE on twisted-tubulofilaments. Other abnormal structures laterally adhacent to the tubulofilaments are not stained, x 35 000. immunoelectronmicroscopy, apoE was localised to the twisted tubulofilaments (figure). None of the 23 control muscle specimens, including 7 polymyositis, 2 morphologically-nonspecific myopathies, 6 amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and 8 normal muscle, had apoE-positive inclusions characteristic of these two inclusion-body muscle diseases.

ApoE has not previously been found in human muscle. The presence of apoE deposits in muscle fibres of patients with sporadic inclusion-body myositis and hereditary inclusion- body myopathy enhances the possibility that pathogenic mechanisms of these disorders and Alzheimer's disease may have similarities. The relevance of apoE deposition in the brain to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease is not known. Because inclusion-body muscle can be biopsied for various studies, and cultured genetically abnormal hereditary inclusion- body myopathy muscle fibres manifest at least some of their in-vivo characteristic phenotypic abnormalities,s further studies of these muscles diseases might shed light on the pathogenic role of apoE in these diseases and in Alzheimer's disease.

Valerie Askanas, Massimiliano Mirabella, W King Engel, Renate B Alvarez, Karl H Weisgraber USC Neuromuscular Center, University of Southern California School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90017-1912, USA; and J David Gladstone Institutes, University of California San Francisco 1 Namba Y, Tomonaga M, Kawasaki H, Otomo E, Ikeda K.

Apolipoprotein E immunoreactivity in cerebral amyloid desposits and neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer's disease and kuru plaque amyloid in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Brain Res 1991; 541: 163-66.

Paracentesis for acute renal failure caused by hepatic veno-occlusive disease SIR&mdash;Veno-occlusive disease (VOD) complicating bone- marrow transplantation (BMT) is a frequent life-threatening complication occurring in 20-50% of patients with a death rate of up to 50%.1 It begins 1-3 weeks after transplantation with sudden weight gain, hepatomegaly, ascites, and hyperbilirubinaemia. If associated with uraemia, particularly if haemodialysis is necessary, the prognosis is especially poor with a death rate of 84% . We report the successful treatment of renal failure associated with severe VOD, well documented by pulsed doppler sonography, with a combination of paracentesis, recombinant tissue-plasminogen-activator, prostaglandin E2, and full-dose anticoagulation with heparin.

A 31-year-old man was treated in January, 1993, for poor-prognosis acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. He achieved complete remission in March, 1993, after two cycles of myeloablative chemotherapy and received T-cell-depleted BMT from his HLA-identical sister in May, 1993, after conditioning by chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Cyclosporin was given for prophylaxis against graft-versus-host disease and heparin for prevention of VOD.

The early post-transplant course was favourable. On day 13, liver and kidney function tests were normal. During the following days, urine output decreased, accompanied by urinary sodium of 17 mmol/L, weight gain, and increase in blood urea nitrogen. On day 17, despite diuretics, volume expansion with albumin, and introduction of dopamine, oliguria with pronounced ascites developed. Pulsed doppler sonography revealed inversion of portal venous flow without obstruction, supporting the diagnosis of VOD.

Alteplase was administered at a dose of 10 mg on day 18, 30 mg on day 19,40 mg on day 20, and 30 mg on day 21 combined with heparin. Within the first 48 hours, diuresis continued to decrease; blood urea nitrogen rose to 25-9 mmol/L, and liver tests deteriorated. The mean arterial pressure was 80 mm Hg and central venous pressure was maintained between 6 and 17 mm Hg. On day 20, paracentesis of 2920 mL of ascites was done and was followed over the next 12 hours by a diuresis of 4 L. Thereafter, a daily diuresis of 3-4 L was sustained with minimum diuretic prescription and renal function improved. At this point, pulsed doppler sonography still revealed inversion of portal venous flow and prostaglandin E2 (500 pg daily by continuous infusion) was started. A second paracentesis of 2800 mL was done on day 25. Dopamine and prostaglandin E2were stopped by day 26 and 47, respectively. Bodyweight returned to baseline by day 29. Biological indices gradually returned to normal. On day 32 pulsed doppler sonography revealed normal portal venous flow. On day 50 the patient was discharged with normal renal function.

The aetiology of acute renal failure associated with VOD after BMT is not yet clearly understood. In our patient, the impressive recovery in diuresis and renal function after paracentesis suggests that the acute increase in intra- abdominal pressure had interfered with the renal perfusion. The role of paracentesis is much debated in the treatment of cirrhosis; it is useful and safe in the management of refractory ascites but is not recommended in the hepatorenal syndrome even if transient improvement in renal function has been reported.4,s The use of recombinant tissue-plasminogenactivator was associated with a favourable outcome in 5 of 10 patients with severe VOD but the renal response was not as striking as the liver response.6 In our patient, renal recovery occurred before reduction in portal hypertension. The treatment of VOD includes recombinant tissue-plasminogenactivator associated with heparin and prostaglandin E2.

Combination of these treatments in association with paracentesis was associated with a successful outcome. Neither side-effects nor bleeding were observed during the treatment period and paracentesis, to our knowledge, is not reported to be a dangerous procedure if done 6 hours after therapy.

Patrick Saudan, Pierre-Yves Martin, Dominique Jaques, Philippe Schonenberg, Claudine Helg, Herve Favre Department of Medicine, Geneva University Hospital, 1211 Geneva 14, Switzerland

