Alzheimer's Disease and Prion Proteins: A Meeting Made in Muscle

One fascinating feature of science is unpredictability. Novel approaches to longstanding and difficult problems can be found unexpectedly in the most unlikely locales.

The hallmark of Alzheimer disease (AD) is the selective presence and accumulation in the brain of several abnormal proteins. One of these proteins is amy- loid ( protein (AP), a 39 to 43-residue peptide that results from the metabolic breakdown of a larger 3 protein precursor (OPP). Extracellular deposition of AP3 in the form of insoluble filamentous aggregates in the brain parenchyma leads to the formation of the amyloid plaques, a primary lesion of AD.1' 2 Another protein that accumulates inside neurons to form twisted filaments, called paired helical filaments (PHFs), is a phosphorylated form of T, a microtubule- associated protein that normally promotes microtu- bule assembly. PHFs form bundles, the neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), which may lead to neuronal degen- eration. 3  Over the years, the concomitant presence of these two proteins has puzzled investigators.4 While forma- tion of AP deposits in amyloid plaques is specific to AD and to conditions strictly related to AD such as the sporadic and hereditary forms of cerebral hemor- rhage with amyloidosis,5 NFTs can be observed in a variety of conditions including viral infections, neo- plasms, and neurodegenerative diseases other than AD.6,7

The chicken-or-egg question has been raised endlessly concerning the relationship of AP3 and abnor- mal T and of the two corresponding lesions, amyloid plaques and NFT. The selective presence and accumulation of an abnormal protein is also the distinctive feature of the prion diseases or spongiform encephalopathies.6 In these diseases, the prion protein (PrP), a normal membrane protein of undetermined function, is thought to undergo a conformational change, be- come partially insoluble, and form aggregates of vari- ous sizes in brain including prion amyloid plaques. In several prion diseases, prion plaques are present along with NFTs, which are indistinguishable from those present in AD.9

A major limitation in the study of these abnormal proteins and their relationships is their selective pres- ence in human brain tissue, which is difficult to biopsy and maintain in culture.

In a series of studies, Valerie Askanas, King Engel, and co-workers1 -13 have shown that PHF made largely of phosphorylated T and containing ubiquitin epitopes as the PHF of AD, amyloid deposits made of AP3 as the amyloid deposits of AD, fPP, Apo E, and PrP are all present concurrently in muscle fibers of patients with sporadic and hereditary forms of muscle disease called inclusion body myositis and myopa- thy. In a previous study, these authors showed that f3PP mRNA is increased in the affected muscle fibers of these two conditions.14 In this issue, they report the increase and redistribution of PrP mRNA in the affected muscle fibers. 14 These findings are important on at least four accounts. First, all the abnormal proteins characteristic of AD, ie, abnormal T, AP3, fPP, ubiquitin, and Apo E, are present together and in abnormal amounts in a tissue other than central nervous tissue, and in a dis- ease other than AD and prion diseases. Second, for the first time AP3 amyloid is seen in an intracellular compartment. Third, PrP is also present, along with the abnormal proteins of AD, in the inclusion bodies of these muscle disorders. Fourth, ,BPP and PrP are seen for the first time together at the neuromuscular junction.

The first issue goes to the essence of AD and raises the question of whether lesions characteristic of AD represent the pathological phenotype of a primary disease unique to the central nervous tissue or are a response to common conditions that may occur in a variety of tissues. A current pathogenetic hypothesis of AD that favors this second possibility is predicated on ,BPP overexpression.

The idea that AP deposition may be secondary to overexpression of pPP and that in turn NFT formation is secondary to the AP deposition has been around for a long time, supported by the high prevalence of AD in individuals with trisomy 21 who have an extra copy of the IPP gene.16 This idea has provided the ration- ale for generating transgenic animal models of AD based on fPP overexpression. Moreover, evidence that molecules that mediate inflammatory responses co-localize with the AD lesions and that some of them such as interleukin-1 upregulate fPP expression17 has provided new support for this contention. Thus, despite the lack of firm evidence of increased ,3PP expression in non-trisomy 21-related AD and the failure of transgenic animals overexpressing ,BPP to show amyloidogenesis, the possibility that the lesions characteristic of AD represent a stereotyped patho- logical phenotype caused by multiple etiological con- ditions18 resulting in fPP overexpression must be se- riously considered. The presence in pathological muscle fibers of AP amyloid and of PHF with the same features as those of AD is consistent with the hypothesis that these abnormal proteins are the result of mul- tiple or nonspecific etiologies, and in a sense their presence may be interpreted as a cellular reaction to different conditions. It is of note that the sporadic form of inclusion body myositis is characterized by the presence of a robust inflammatory response.13 In contrast, the inflammatory reaction is lacking in the hereditary form of inclusion body myopathy.13 Thus, the presence of AP amyloid deposits and PHF might be the response to a form of chronic inflammation in the sporadic form and to a genetic condition in the hereditary form. A similar pathogenesis can be pos- tulated in AD. Moreover, the concomitant presence in a muscle disease of the same set of proteins that char- acterize the molecular pathology of AD suggests that the presence of each protein is correlated and pre- sumably represents a step in a coordinated response shared by different cell types.

The second issue, ie, the finding that AP' is intra- cellular in inclusion body myopathy and myositis, is intriguing. Current evidence from cell cultures indi- cates that the normal metabolic pathway leading to the production of AP entails consecutive cleavages of ,BPP at the N-and C-terminals of A,B, which is then rapidly released from the cell.2'19 It is unclear how AP is generated in the AD brain. However, AP3 amyloid has never been demonstrated in a cellular compart- ment.2'19 Several mechanisms can explain the intra- cellular presence of amyloid fibrils in AP muscle. AP amyloid may be formed intracellularly in the central nervous tissue, but it may become immediately ex- tracellular upon formation because it damages the plasma membrane. Consistent with this mechanism is the evidence of membrane damage in cells adjacent to AP amyloid fibrils in brain.20 '21 One may postulate that muscle cell membrane is more resistant to AP3 fibrils, which then remain intracellular. Alternatively, AP3 metabolism may be different in muscle cells from that of brain cells so that AP3 fibrils may be formed and kept inside the muscle cell. In fact, evidence has been obtained for AL amyloid fiber formation within the rough endoplasmic reticulum of plasma cells.22

The third issue raised by the findings of Askanas, Engel and co-workers10-13 is the presence of PrP, along with the abnormal molecules characteristic of AD, in the abnormal muscle fibers of subjects with inclusion body muscle disease. The coexistence of AP3 and PrP in amyloid plaques has been reported.23 Commonly, AP3 is detected by immunostaining around PrP plaques in subjects with sporadic prion diseases such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease as well as familial prion diseases such as Gertsmann-Straussler-Scheinker disease and a subtype of familial prion dis- ease characterized by base pair insertions in the PrP gene. 23,24 The association of AP amyloid angiopathy in sub- jects with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and diffuse PrP plaques has also been reported.25 Since most of these subjects were older than 60 years of age and the AD prevalence for that age group is >5% the pos- sibility that the presence of AP is simply due to aging cannot be ruled out. However, the AP3 preferential lo- cation at the periphery of the PrP neuritic plaques and the coexistence of PrP and amyloid f plaques in a subject who died at 43 years of age suggest that this association is not entirely fortuitous and that at least the distribution if not the presence of AP is influenced by the presence of PrP.23 '24 For example, the depo- sition of AP may be facilitated by the degeneration of the neurites of the PrP plaques,23 a possibility con- sistent with the increased amount of f3PP in degen- erating neurites of PrP neuritic plaques.23

Despite the presence of PrP, the inclusion body myositis and myopathy remain to be classified as prion diseases because the resistance of the PrP to the proteinase K, which is the current requirement of the prion diseases, was not determined in the inclusion body muscle diseases. Another point of difference shown in the paper published in this issue is that, at variance with prion diseases, in inclusion body muscle diseases PrP expression is upregulated.

Thus, as Sarkozi et al.14 point out, the presence of increased amounts of PrP in inclusion body muscle disease is unlikely to be related to classical prion dis- eases. To explain the presence of relatively large amounts of a variety of proteins, including 3PP and PrP in inclusion body myositis and myopathy, Askanas, Engel and co-workers' 0-13 hypothesize that 3PP, PrP, and other proteins are the result of the patho- logical upregulation of yet another unidentified gene whose protein in turn upregulates expression of fPP, PrP, and other genes.10'13 Such a mechanism, which of course is analogous to that of the activation of the heat shock system, is plausible also because expres- sion of both OPP and PrP can be upregulated by the same factors and under the same conditions and both ,BPP and PrP co-localize in the neuromuscular junction and thus are likely to be coordinately controlled.

The finding that ,BPP, PrP, and many of the other proteins present in the vacuoles of the muscle fibers in inclusion body myositis or myopathy are proteins of the postsynaptic neuromuscular junction in normal muscle cells raises another important issue.11'12 Be- cause of the structural and functional similarities be- tween neuromuscular junction and synapse of the central nervous system (CNS), the finding that f3PP and PrP are proteins of the normal neuromuscular junction provides important evidence that these two proteins are synaptic in the CNS.

A number of reasons support this possibility. outgrowth.26'30 The role of f3PP and PrP in synaptic function with CNS, as the data from the Askanas and Engel group10-13 also indicate, would provide grounds for the contention that AD and prion diseases begin at the synapse. The recent finding that the ab- normal protein of Huntington's disease is a compo- nent of the synaptic vesicle (J.P. Steiner, personal communication) would group AD, prion diseases, and Huntington's chorea, three major neurodegenerative conditions of the CNS, as diseases starting at the synapse. The series of previous studies from Askanas and Engel's group10-13 as well as the study published in this issue14 leave at least two major questions unan- swered. First, to understand the role of OPP and PrP upregulation in inclusion body myositis and myopa- thy, it is of crucial importance that these authors de- termine whether the upregulation of these two pro- teins is selective or part of an increased expression of all or most proteins in those muscle diseases. Similarly, it is important to establish in detail similarities and differences between inclusion body diseases and regeneration in muscle. Second, to establish a definitive similarity between muscle and brain PHF, the isoform of the T present in PHF of inclusion body diseases should be identified. Specifically, it is im- portant to know whether phosphorylated T present in the inclusion bodies is analogous to the brain fetal or PHF isoform. Several additional studies may add in- sight to the findings of Askanas and Engel. For ex- ample, it would be interesting to determine whether the heat shock system is activated in muscle cells with inclusion bodies or whether exposing muscle cells to chronic stress leads to the presence of inclusions containing the abnormal proteins characteristic of in- clusion body myositis; since Apo E is present in the muscle cell vacuoles of subjects with inclusion body myositis and myopathy, Apo E typing of these subjects may show whether Apo E polymorphism plays a role in these diseases. Finally, linkage analysis carried out in large families with the hereditary form of inclusion body myopathy may lead to the identification of the gene responsible for this condition and the identification of this gene may shed light on the accumulation of 3PP, AP3 and PrP and consequently on the pathogenesis of AD and prion diseases. These and other questions concerning the meta- bolic events leading to the concomitant presence of all these proteins relevant to AD and prion diseases may be answered by growing cultures of muscle cells with the inclusion body disease phenotype. More- over, such cultures would provide an important tool to test manipulations that interfere with AP3 amyloid and PHF formation. Such cultures, according to Askanas Engel and collaborators, 10,13 are at hand.

