Abnormal Accumulation of Prion Protein mRNA In Muscle Fibers of Patients with Sporadic Inclusion-Body Myositis and Hereditary Inclusion-Body Myopathy

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis is the most common progressive muscle disease of older patients. the muscle biopsy demonstrates mono- nuclear ceUl inflammation and vacuolated muscle fibers containing paired helical fila- ments and 6 to 10-nm fibrils, both resembling those of Alzheimer brain, and Congo-red posi- tivity. Hereditary inclusion-body myopathy des- ignates patients cytopathologicaly similar but without inflammation. In both muscle diseases, prion, and severalproteins characteristic ofAlz- heimer brain-eg, g3amyloid protein and hyper- phosphorylated tau (which normaly are ex- pressed mainly in neurons), and apolipoprotein E-are abnormaly accumulated in vacuolated musclefibers, by unknown mechanisms. We now demonstrate in both muscle diseases that prion mRNA is strongly expressed in the vacuolated muscle fibers, which suggests that their accu- mulated prion protein results, at least partly, from increased gene expression. This, to our knowledge, is the first demonstration of abnor- maly increased prion mRNA in human disease. Another novel finding is the increased prion mRNA in human muscle macrophages, and both increased prion protein and prion mRNA in regenerating muscle fibers. The latter indicates that prion may play a role in human muscle development.

Cellular prion protein (PrPc), expressed mainly in neurons, is a 33 to 37-kd membrane protein anchored by a glycophosphoinositol.1-3 Its function is uncertain. In human muscle, its concentration at neu- romuscular junctions4 supports a hypothesized role in cell-cell recognition, adhesion, or communication. 5,6 Human PrPc is encoded by a single gene con- sisting of two exons and one intron on the short arm of chromosome 20.7

Muscle biopsies of patients with sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM) have muscle fibers with vacuoles containing red and gray staining materials with the Engel-Gomori trichrome reaction,e atrophic muscle fibers, and various degrees of inflam- mation. By electron microscopy, s-IBM vacuolated muscle fibers contain: 1) cytoplasmic "twisted tubulofilaments" of 15 to 21 nm external diameter that are, in fact, "paired helical filaments (PHFs)"; 2) 6-10 nm diameter fibrils; 3) membranous material; and 4) amorphous material (reviewed in ref. 9). The PHFs of IBM strikingly resemble PHFs of Alzheimer disease brain.10

Muscle biopsies from patients with autosomal re- cessive or dominant hereditary inclusion-body myopathy (h-IBM) have those same muscle fiber changes but lack inflammation in the biopsy.9

The exceptional feature of s-and h-IBM vacuolated muscle fibers is abnormal accumulation of a group of proteins: Alzheimer f-amyloid protein (A3),11 C-and N-terminal epitopes of ,3-amyloid precursor protein (/3APP),12 prion,13 apolipoprotein E (ApoE),14 and ubiquitin (Ub).15 Like Alzheimer PHFs, IBM PHFs con- Supported by the Ron Stever and Robert Jani Research Funds.

Accepted for publication August 12, 1994. Address reprint requests to Dr. Valerie Askanas, USC Neuromus- cular Center, 637 South Lucas Ave., Los Angeles, CA 90017-1912. tain hyperphosphorylated tau.10 Also localized to IBM PHFs are prion, ApoE, and ubiquitin, but not AP3 or epitopes of JAPR9 13-15 On the 6 to 10-nm amyloidlike fibrils, prion, AP3 and ubiquitin are co- localized."213 Moreover, IBM vacuolated muscle fibers contain congophillic intracellular amyloid16 of uncertain chemical composition. To ascertain whether accumulation of prion protein in IBM vacu- olated muscle fibers reflects its increased generation there, we performed in situ hybridization using a PrP riboprobe transcribed from a cDNA of the human prion protein gene17 and localized immunoreactive prion protein on parallel sections. hours in prehybridization buffer (50% formamide, 0.75 mol/L NaCI, 0.05 mol/L sodium phosphate buffer pH 7.0, 10 mmol/L EDTA, 200 pg/ml heparin, 5X Den- hardt's solution, 25 pg/ml poly-A, 25 pg/ml poly-C, and 500 pg/ml purified tRNA) containing 10% dextran sulfate and [35S]RNA probe (2 x 108 cpm/ml). After the hybridization, sections were treated with 20 pg/ml RNase A, washed under high stringency conditions at 60 C for 1 hour, and agitated overnight in 1 X SSC. The dehydrated sections were coated with NTB-2 emul- sion and exposed for 8 to 10 weeks.

Immunocytochemistry Materials and Methods

Patients

We studied diagnostic muscle biopsies, performed with informed consent, of 31 patients, aged 34 to 79 years, with the following diagnoses: s-IBM, 10; autosomal-recessive h-IBM, 4 (from 4 different fami- lies); polymyositis, 6; morphologically nonspecific myopathy, 2; amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 4; normal muscle, 5. Diagnosis of all patients was based on clinical, laboratory, muscle-biopsy 18-reaction histo- chemistry,18 and ultrastructural studies. All IBM pa- tients had PHFs by electron microscopy and inclu- sions positive for prion, AP, two other epitopes of I3APP, and ubiquitin.

PrP Riboprobe

We isolated a full-length, human PrPcDNA sequence from pUC8 recombinant clone (HuPrPDNA2)17 using EcoRI digestion. The isolated 2.4-kb DNA fragment (nt 1-2432) was inserted into pGEM-3Z (Promega) downstream to the SP6 promoter using T4 DNA ligase (GIBCO BRL). Both antisense and sense RNA probes were transcribed respectively from HincAll and Ndel linearized recombinant plasmid, using 30 pmol/L 35S- UTP (1300 Ci/mmol/L) and 10 mmol/L each of unla- beled ATP, CTP, and GTP.

In Situ Hybridization

This was performed on 10-p transverse sections of fresh-frozen muscle biopsies as described previ- ously. 19 In brief, sections were fixed in 4% paraform- aldehyde, treated with 0.5% acetic anhydride in 0.1 mol/L triethanolamine (pH 8.0), and prehybridized for 1 hour at 55 C. Hybridization was performed for 3 Immunocytochemical staining was performed on sections serial to those on which in situ hybridization was performed, using the peroxidase-antiperoxidase method following the same general procedure as described.4 1013 To immunolocalize PrP, we used polyclonal antiserum R073 against PrP 27-30,2o which was shown to be very specific in our previous studies.4 '13 Macrophages were identified with mono- clonal antibody Ber-MAC 3 (Dako) and regenerating muscle fibers with a monoclonal antibody against desmin (Zymed).

Results

In normal human muscle fibers, accumulated PrPc mRNA was present at 20 to 30% of the neuromuscular junctions identified by positive acetylcholinesterase reaction (Figure 1, A, B), whereas nonjunctional re- gions expressed no detectable PrPc mRNA (Figure 1,  A, B).

In s-and h-IBM, approximately 80% of the PrP im- munopositive vacuolated muscle fibers expressed very strong PrPcmRNA signal (Figure 1, C-P). Within those fibers, the strong PrPcmRNA signal was typi- cally unevenly distributed, commonly in the form of hot spots (Figure 1, C-P), occasionally correspond- ing to the uneven deposits of PrP immunoreactivity in them (Figure 1, C-P; Figure 2, D-J).

An interesting, but not disease-specific, finding was slightly to moderately increased, evenly distrib- uted PrPcmRNA and PrP immunoreactivity in small regenerating (desmin-positive21) muscle fibers (Fig- ure 2, A-C). These were found in IBM, polymyositis, and other myopathies, suggesting that PrPc may play a role in normal muscle-fiber development. In all muscle biopsies containing necrotic muscle fibers, including s-and h-IBM, polymyositis, and other myopathies, macrophages expressed very strong Figure 1. In situ hybridization ofPrP"mRNA in human musclefibers. In normalfibers, PrPcmRNA is localized only at the neuromuscularjunction (A), where it is co-localized with acetylcholinesterase (B). In sporadic (EF, GH, KL, MN, OP) and hereditary (CD, IJ) IBM, patches of PrPcmRNA signal (C, E, F, G, I, K, M, 0) occur in vacuolated muscle fibers, which also contain immunolocalized PrP protein in multiplefoci (D, F, H, J, L, N, P), sometimes corresponding to the PrPcmRNA patches. Each pair ofpictures, A-P, is from parallel (not necessarily adjacent) sections. All pho- tographs are bright-field except B (interference polarization contrast) and K (dark-field). A, B; X 700; C-J: X 1240; K-N: x2400; 0, P: x 1240.

PrPCmRNA (Figure 2, H-J); however, within the majority of the characteristic IBM vacuolated muscle fibers, mRNA positivity and PrPc immunoreactivity were not associated with macrophages (Figure 2, D-G).

Sense-strand controls were used throughout and produced only a uniformly weak background signal.

Discussion

This demonstration of increased PrPCmRNA in IBM vacuolated muscle fibers identifies the first (to our knowledge) human disease manifesting increased PrPCmRNA. Our study suggests that the PrP abnor- mally accumulated in IBM muscle results, at least partly, from locally increased transcription of PrPc.

PrP scrapie (PrPSc) is a 33-to 37-kd proteinase K-resistant protein resulting from postranslational conversion of PrPc protein into PrPscl -, PrPSc and PrPc are encoded by the same PrPc gene.22 That modification of PrPc can be stimulated by a trans- missible agent or an inherited mutation within the PrPc gene.1'-PrPsc is found in brains of scrapie- infected animals and patients with kuru, Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease, and Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker syndrome.1-3 Those brains are characterized by spongiform (vacuolar) degeneration of gray mat- ter, neuronal loss, and prion-positive amyloid plaques. [1][2][3]23 Before our study, the only abnormal human tissue in which PrP and its mRNA have been studied were brains of patients with prion diseases; they did not have increased PrPCmRNA, nor did brains of scrapie- infected animals. [1][2][3]22 Therefore, our findings in IBM contrast with those of prion brain diseases.

Possibly relevant to our results is the recent report that transgenic mice carrying high copy numbers of the wild-type PrPc gene developed muscle weakness and histological evidence of a non-vacuolar myopa- thy and a neuropathy.24 Even though that mouse my- opathy does not resemble IBM morphologically, it is possible that in IBM muscle the increased expression of the PrPc gene itself may be pathogenic. Because IBM vacuolated muscle fibers also contain abnormal In situ bybridization of PrThmRNA in human muscle fibers. In small regenerating muscle fibers (A-C), identified by a monoclonal an- tibody againist desmin (C)! there was a slight to moderate amount ofdiffuse PrPmRNA signal (B) and PrPprotein immunoreactivity (A). Within an IBM vacuolated muscle fiber (D-G), there is strong PrPcmRNA signal (E, bright-field; F, dark-field) and PrP protein immunoreactivity (D), but no immunoreactivity with a macrophage-specific marker ( monoclonal antibody Ber-MAC 3) (G). In a polymyositis musclefiber undergoing phagocy- tosis (H-J), a cltuster of macrophages in the center strongly immunoreactive with the macrophage-specific marker (J) express a strong PrPTmRNA signal (H, bright-field; I, dark-field). A-C: X 1240; D-J: X2400.

accumulation of several proteins characteristic of Al- zheimer brain and express increased 13APP mRNA19 (mRNAs of the other proteins have not yet been stud- ied), it is possible that one or more of the abnormally accumulated proteins can activate transcription of the other proteins. Because PrPc and 3APP mRNAs can, under certain circumstances, be regulated by the same factor,25 and both f3APP26 and prion (this study) are up-regulated in regenerating muscle fi- bers, an alternative possibility exists. In s-and h-IBM there might be a pathological up-regulation of an- other, yet-unidentified gene-one normally silent in mature muscle fibers that may, through its product, up-regulate PrPc, f3APP, and other genes normally ex- pressed in brain but not in mature muscle fibers (other than at neuromuscular junctions). Changes in abnor- mal muscle fibers of IBM do not simply reflect regen- erating properties because they contain PHFs and other IBM-characteristic features not present in re- generating muscle fibers. Therefore, in s-and h-IBM, there may be a co-existing defect in processing or disposal of prion and perhaps some of the other pro- teins, and/or an abnormal polymerization/binding/ precipitation of them (which might or might not be a consequence of supply-side exuberance).

Because the accumulations of PrP and fAPP in s- and h-IBM muscle and in abnormal brain have similar features, mechanisms of their accumulation may have important similarities. Cultured IBM muscle, which expresses several aspects of IBM pathology,27 can serve as a living model of a genetic human dis- ease characterized by abnormalities of both prion and 3APP.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Dr. Stanley B. Prusiner for the gift of human PrPcDNA and PrP antibodies.

Figure2. In situ bybridization of PrThmRNA in human muscle fibers. In small regenerating muscle fibers (A-C), identified by a monoclonal an- tibody againist desmin (C)! there was a slight to moderate amount ofdiffuse PrPmRNA signal (B) and PrPprotein immunoreactivity (A). Within an IBM vacuolated muscle fiber (D-G), there is strong PrPcmRNA signal (E, bright-field; F, dark-field) and PrP protein immunoreactivity (D), but no immunoreactivity with a macrophage-specific marker ( monoclonal antibody Ber-MAC 3) (G). In a polymyositis musclefiber undergoing phagocy- tosis (H-J), a cltuster of macrophages in the center strongly immunoreactive with the macrophage-specific marker (J) express a strong PrPTmRNA signal (H, bright-field; I, dark-field). A-C: X 1240; D-J: X2400.

