Neurotrophic regulation of mouse muscle β-amyloid protein precursor and α<sub>1</sub>-antichymotrypsin as revealed by axotomy

Kunitz-inhibitor containing forms of the 8-amyloid precursor protein (BAPP), known also as protease nexin 11 (PNII), and a,-antichymotrypsin (a,-ACT), a serpin, are important components of the serine protease and inhibitor balance in many tissues. In the nervous system, this balance may have trophic or growth factor activity at different stages of development, after injury and in disease states. In the current study, using immunocytochemistry and Western blotting with antibodies against the human homologues, we analyzed whether denervation affected the localization of BAPP and a,-ACT in adult mouse muscle following axotomy. In mouse muscle, antihuman (r,-ACT antibody detected a 60 k D immunoreactive band and anti-human BAPP antibody a band a t 92 kD in both normal and denervated extracts. BAPP was present in normal mouse muscle at both neuromuscular junctions and within intramuscular nerves. a,-ACT was also detected at neuromuscular junctions, on the perineurium and endothelial cell surfaces. Following axotomy, both BAPP and a,-ACT disappeared from intramuscular nerves simultaneously. However, a t the neuromuscular junction, a,-ACT decreased more rapidly with BAPP lingering before disappearing. Since both a,-ACT as well as BAPP are present within senile plaques in Alzheimer's disease brains such experiments with the nicotinic, cholinergic neuromuscular synapse in denervated muscle may help to focus experiments on the mechanism of synapse loss as well as plaque deposition in this disease.

INTRODUCTION

The pAPP is the end product of a gene located on human chromosome 21, and on mouse chromosome 16 (Cheng et al., 1988;Goldgaber et al., 1987). This gene is expressed in most mammalian Received September 17, 1993;accepted December 10, 1993Journal of Neurobiology, Vol. 25, No. 5 , pp. 503-514 (1994) 0 1994 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ccc 0022-3034/94/050503-12 tissues and at particularly high levels in brain and peripheral tissues such as muscle (Kang and Muller-Hill, 1990). pAPP may consist of three major proteins of 695, 751, or 770 amino acids depending on the alternative splicing of two exons of 186 and 57 base pairs (Goldgaber et al., 1987;Tanzi et al., 1988;Ponte et al., 1988;Kitaguchi et al., 1988). The larger exon encodes a sequence of 56 amino acids which exhibits a high degree of homology to the Kunitz family of serine protease inhibitors (Tanzi et al., 1988;Ponte et al., 1988;Kitaguchi et al., 1988).

Previous studies have shown two major pAPP proteins with estimated molecular mass of 120 kD and 105 kD in the human brain (Palmert et al., 1989). The 120 kD form of PAPP contains a Kunitz-type protein inhibitor ( K P J ) domain, whereas the 105 kD form is devoid of this KPI domain (Palmert et al., 1989). Constitutive cleavage of PAPP gives rise to a large soluble form ( 100 kD) identical to the serine protease inhibitor, protease nexin I1 (PNII; Oltersdorf et al., 1989;Van Nostrand et al., 1989). Aberrant proteolytic cleavage of the PAPP was thought to be necessary to generate the P-amyloid protein (AP) containing 39-43 amino acids found in amyloid deposits in senile plaques and blood vessels in patients with Alzheimer's disease. However, the various proteolytic events that cleave AP from PAPP leading to amyloid deposition have not been clarified (Masters et al., 1985 a,b) and secretion of A@ has been shown to occur normally (Haass et al., 1992;Shoji et al., 1992). In addition, other proposed functions for DAPP based on in vifro studies include an autocrine or growth-promoting function (Saitoh et al., 1989), participation in cell adhesion as an extracellular matrix protein (Schubert et al., 1989a), rapid inhibition of coagulation factor XIa (Smith et al., 1990), and as a cell surface receptor (Kang et al., 1987). a,-ACT is a circulating glycoprotein belonging to the superfamily of serine protease inhibitors now known as serpins. This protein shares homologies with other serpins and is highly glycosylated with five potential sites of glycosylation. The latter finding implies that a large range of molecular weights may be observed depending both on the species and the tissue concerned (Chandra et al., 1983). The physicochemical properties of a,-ACT have been extensively studied (Travis et al., 1978;  Baumann et al., 1991 ), but its precise physiological role remains unclear. Despite its name, a,-ACT is a weak inhibitor of pancreatic chymotrypsin (Morii and Travis, 1983 ) . It is a much better inhibitor of several inflammation-associated serine proteases such as neutrophil cathepsin G and mast cell chymase (Travis et al., 1978). It also binds DNA and inhibits DNA polymerase a (Tsuda et al.,  1986). a,-ACT serum concentration increases dramatically during the process of inflammation ( Aronsen et al., 1972; Travis and Salvesen, 1983), in some cases of cancer, and although controversial, in patients suffering from Alzheimer's disease (Gaffar et al., 1980;Lilja et al., 1992;Brugge et al. 1992). Along with PAPP (Abraham et al., 1988;Roher et al., 1993), a,-ACT is also associated with senile amyloid plaques in brains of Alzheimer's disease patients. Both a,-ACT antigen as well as serpin activity are present in normal cerebrospinal fluid (Rayford et al., 1992). &,-ACT antigen concentration in serum (Matsubara et al., 1988;Lilja et al., 1992) as well as in CSF (Matsubara et al., 1990) was reported to increase in patients with Alzheimer's disease, but studies of serpin activity were not performed.

Another serpin, protease nexin I (PNI) was the first of this class to be localized to a synapse, the neuromuscular junction (NMJ) ( HantaY et al.,  1988; Festoff et al., 1991 ). Subsequently, the Kunitz inhibitor PAPPIPNII was also found concentrated at the NMJ (Schubert et al., 1991;Askanas et al., 1992). a,-ACT was recently found in pathological inclusions in muscle of patients with inclusion body myositis (Bilak et al., 1993) but no studies of normal localization have been reported. In this study we investigated the presence and localization of both PAPPIPNII and a,-ACT in normal mouse skeletal muscle and determined the effects of denervation using immunocytochemistry and immunoblotting with polyclonal antibodies against their human homologues. The rationale was to determine if we could destabilize the balance between protease and inhibitors, hypothesized to exist at the synapse (Hantafet al., 1988), by severing the nerve (Festoff et al., 1986). We chose the peripheral cholinergic, nicotinic neuromuscular synapse since this is the most understood vertebrate synapse (Hall and Sanes, 1993), is convenient to study, and is simpler in terms of presynaptic input than cholinergic synapses in the central nervous system. Since interneuronal synapses resemble the NMJ in structure and function (Vaughn, 1989), the data obtained should be helpful in understanding the former.'

MATERIALS AND METHODS

BALB/c mice of both sexes, 6-10 weeks old (Centre d'Elevage R. Janvier, Le Genest, France), were anesthetized with intraperitoneal injection ( 10 pl/g) of a mixture of ketamine ( 5 mg/ml) and acepromazine ( 1 mg/ ml), and the sciatic nerve was transected 12 mm distal to the sciatic notch. At various times (4, 20, and 36 days) after axotomy, animals were killed by cervical dislocation, denervated and contralateral (unoperated) control gastrocnemius muscles were removed.

pAPP and a,-ACT lmmunocytochemistry and Acetylcholine Receptors Visualization

For immunocytochemistry, muscles were frozen without fixation by quick immersion in isopentane chilled in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until used. We made 8-pm transverse cryostat sections and deposited these on gelatin-subbed microscope slides. We used the following polyclonal antibodies: goat anti-human PAPP695 and rabbit anti-human PAPP770 (made against the respective recombinant proteins but unable to distinguish differences in tissue; Lowery et al., 199 I ), and rabbit anti-human a,-ACT (Calbiochem no. 17821.6). All antibodies were diluted 1:lOO in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) containing 0.3% Triton X-100 (PBST) and I% bovine serum albumin (BSA) and were incubated for 2 h at room temperature. Then tetramethylrhodamine-labeleda-bungarotoxin( Molecular Probes) diluted 1:lOOO was incubated together with the first antibodies to identify acetylcholine receptors ( AChRs) on NMJs.

Sections were further incubated for 1 h in either antigoat or anti-rabbit biotinylated F (ab')' fragments of IgG ( Amersham) diluted I: 100 in PBST, then in fluorescein isothyocyanate-( FITC) tagged streptavidin (Amersham) diluted 1: 100 in PBST for 1 h. Each step was followed by extensive washing with PBS. Negative controls were performed by replacing the primary antibody with nonimmune goat or rabbit serum. The sections were then mounted in Mowiol mounting medium (Heimer and Taylor, 1974) under coverslips and viewed with a Zeiss Axiophot microscope using specific Ploem filters for fluorescein or rhodamine. Micrographs for each specific primary antibody were taken and printed at the same exposure to allow direct comparison.

Muscle Tissue Extract Preparation and pAPP and a,-ACT lmmunoblotting

For immunoblotting leg muscles were removed, blotted, weighed wet, and then homogenized in 10 m M Tris HCl, 150 mMNaCl,2 mMEDTA, 2 mMphenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), 10 pg/ml leupeptin, 25 pg/ ml aprotinin, 10 pg/ml pepstatin, pH 7.6 (1:lO w/v) with a Polytron (Brinkmann, Switzerland) tissue homogenizer using three 10-s bursts, all at 4°C. Homogenates were centrifuged at 1,500 g for 15 min, giving a supernatant ( S 1 ) and a pellet ( P 1 ). S l was further centrifuged at 300,000 g for 6 min, giving a supernatant (S2) and a pellet (P2). PI was resuspended in sample buffer ( 1:5 w/v) containing 2% Triton X-100. After all procedures, aliquots of fractions were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80°C until used. After separation of the P 1 and S2 fractions by sodium dodecylsulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) on 10% or 8%-16% gradient polyacrylamide gels (Laemmli, 1970), the proteins were transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane (Towbin et al., 1979). The membrane was incubated in blocking buffer (PBST + 2% casein) for 1 h, then after rinsing, incubated in PAPP or a,-ACT antibodies diluted 1: 1000 in PBST overnight at 4°C. In the case of PAPP695 antibody only, the nitrocellulose membrane was incubated for 1 h in 1:lOO diluted rabbit anti-goat secondary antibody. In all cases, the nitrocellulose membranes were further incubated in '"1 Protein A (0.1 pCi/ ml, Amersham) for 90 min at room temperature. Each incubation was followed by extensive washing with PBS. The blots were then revealed with a Kodak X-ray film using a screen intensifier.

Staining of Myofibrillar ATPase Activity

To distinguish between slow and fast muscles, staining of myofibrillary ATPase activity was done at pH 9.4 following established methods (Brooke and Kaiser, 1969).

Other Assays

Protein determination was estimated by using bicinchoninic acid (Pierce) protein assay. All other chemicals were of reagent grade.

RESULTS lmmunocytochemical Detection of DAPP and a,-ACT in Normal and Denervated Adult Mouse Skeletal Muscle

In normal, nondenervated muscle, immunocytochemical staining with antibodies against pAPP showed prominent labeling of the intramuscular axons and Schwann cells in both slow and fast gastrocnemius muscle [Figs. 1 ( A ) and 2 ( C ) ] . The endothelial cells of blood vessels were also stained and the perinuclear areas were lightly decorated. In slow muscle only, a faint labeling was observed at the periphery of the muscle fibers, outlining the muscle sarcolemma at the endomysium [Fig.

2( B)]

. This differential staining of slow and fast muscles was eliminated by the denervation process (vide infra). In all muscle sections, NMJs identified by tetramethylrhodamine-labeled a-bungarotoxin, were intensely stained by both anti-PAPP antibodies (Table 1 ) . a,-ACT was also present in all NMJs of normal skeletal muscle [Fig. 3(A)]. In addition to the NMJs, anti-a,-ACT antibody weakly stained the sarcoplasm of muscle fibers, leaving all the extracellular matrices ( endomysium and perimysium) as were endothelial cells of blood vessels.

The results obtained in denervated skeletal muscle were quite different. We found that 4 days after denervation the labeling of sciatic nerve axons completely disappeared using both anti-PAPP antibodies [Figs. l ( C ) and 2( For a,-ACT, staining was absent in the motor axons and began to disappear in the NMJs of both slow and fast muscles at 4 days with some variable staining of neuromuscular synapses (not shown). At 20 days axons and NMJs were essentially unstained [Fig. 2(F) and 3(C)]. However, a faint persistent staining of a,-ACT was observed in the perineurium and in endothelial cells, even after 1 month of denervation [Fig. 3 (E)] . These immunocytochemical results and the time course of disappearance of both a,-ACT and PAPP have been quantified at the NMJ and are summarized in Table 1.

Other experiments showed that with the sciatic nerve crush paradigm instead of the more definitive axotomy, staining of the NMJ with anti-PAPP antibodies and anti-a,-ACT antibody first disappears and then reappears during the process of reinnervation (not shown).

lmmunoblots of Normal and Denervated

Mouse Muscle Extract with BAPP and a,-ACT Antibodies (Fig. 4).

To determine the specific murine muscle polypeptides identified with these antibodies to human proteins in the immunocytochemistry experi-ments, we performed Western blots of both normal and denervated skeletal muscle and probed these polypeptides with anti-PAPP and a,-ACT antibodies. Anti-PAPP detected a band of -92 kD in both the soluble (S2; Fig. 4/left) and membrane-associated (P 1 ) fractions.

Using the anti-a,-ACT antibody, one band migrating at -60 kD was detected in the soluble fraction of both normal and denervated muscle extracts [ Fig. 4 (middle)]. When the primary antibody was omitted or nonimmune sera was used instead of the antibodies, the blot remained completely unstained.

DISCUSSION

These results demonstrate that both PAPP and a,-ACT, previously shown to be present in skeletal muscle (Schubert et al., 1991;Askanas et al., 1992), undergo profound modifications, especially at NMJs, during the processes following muscle denervation. PAPP is present within the nerve axons and in response to denervation disappears rapidly from the distal intramuscular part of the nerve. These results support evidence that PAPP is synthesized in the nerve cell and transported within axons. Recent experimental evidence suggests a significant fraction of the intracellular PAPP, which is synthesized in neuronal cell bodies, is located in vesicles (Catterucia et al., 1990), and may be inserted in the axolemma and/ or may be destined to the nerve endings undergoing a fast axonal transport (Koo et al., 1990) where full-length APP695 is the major isoform (Sisodia et al., and Price, 1993). The microtubule network has been shown to play a major role in intracellular vesicular protein transport including fast axonal transport (Grafstein and Forman, 1980;Kelly, 1990). Although less clear for a,-ACT, because of its perineurial location and its less rapid decrease from this site after denervation, a similar mechanism might also exist. It may also be, that like PNI (Festoff et al., 1991) a,-ACT is synthesized primarily in muscle, Schwann cell (and, possibly, endothelial cells) but is influenced by the loss of trophic activity following denervation. Pericellular staining of PAPP surrounding only slow muscle rhodamine a-bungarotoxin. Stained end plates, either anti-PAPP or tetramethyl-rhodamine a-bungarotoxin (curved arrows) and unstained end plate (anti-PAPP, arrow). Magnification: 230X.  ' Three animals were used in each experiment.

fibers, as shown by the myofibrillary ATPase reaction, favors a nerve-muscle ( neurotrophic) interaction in the control of PAPP. ATPase fiber type is under the control ofthe nerve and vice-versa (Mira and Fardeau, 1978).

Our results also show that pAPP and a,-ACT are highly concentrated at the neuromuscular synapse in normal muscle. Precisely where at the synapse, pre-or postsynaptic membrane or basement membrane, this Kunitz inhibitor and serpin are located will require ultrastructural analysis. After denervation at the NMJs, a,-ACT begins disappearing first. At 4 days, a time when it has completely disappeared from axons, a,-ACT is present only in some NMJs. PAPP remains longer but it is also completely absent at the NMJ 1 month after denervation. The fact that a,-ACT and PAPP disappear from the NMJ later than their loss from the nerve may signify that their turnover is less rapid there than in the nerve. Alternatively, they may be more protected from degradation locally or possibly they may not only be synthesized in the nerve but may amve from the circulation and/ or be synthesized in the muscle fiber or teloglial Schwann cell. This mechanism may be similar for a,-ACT, although it is also probable that a,-ACT is taken up from the bloodstream into the muscle by endocytosis as it has been shown in certain carcinomas (Takada et al., 1986). In this respect it is interesting to note that a ,-ACT, an inhibitor of inflammation-associated serine proteases, may be more sensitive to denervation.

By immunoblotting of both soluble and membrane-bound fractions of muscle extracts, we identified a band migrating at 92 kD on SDS-PAGE that is labeled by anti-PAPP antibody in both control and denervated muscle. These results suggest that PAPP in skeletal muscle is not only synthe-sized by neuronal cells (Schubert et al.,199 1 ) but also by other cells such as the muscle fiber or may be secreted by platelets (Cole et al., 1990) and brought to the muscle by the bloodstream. It is known that platelets, stimulated with calcium ionophore or thrombin, secrete significant amounts of PAPP (Van Nostrand et al., 1990;Cole et al., 1990). These PAPPs undergo extensive posttranslational modifications including glycosylation, sulfation, and phosphorylation and on SDS gels appear as a family of proteins migrating between 105 and 140 kD (Schubert et al., 1989b;Oltersdorf et al., 1990). In mouse muscle extracts using our antibodies we found a band migrating only at 92 kD. This may be due to a limited posttranslational modification of the protein or, more likely, that we are detecting the mouse muscle PAPP already shown by others to migrate at 92 kD (Shivers et al., 1988).

In regards to a,-ACT, we found that in both normal and denervated mouse muscle extracts anti-a ,-ACT antibody recognized a band that migrated at 60 kD. The accepted Mr for human a,- ACT is 66 kD (Travis et al., 1978), however, the mouse homologue, known as contrapsin, varies from 55 kD (Takahara and Sinohara, 1982) to 63 kD (Ohkubo et al., 199 1 ) . There might be a local synthesis of a,-ACT. However, since mRNA studies were not performed, we cannot exclude that @,-ACT may be taken up from the circulation into muscle since serum a,-ACT is known to be associated with the processes of inflammation (Aronsen et al., 1972;Travis and Salvesen, 1983). Regardless, the apparent discrepancy with the decrease observed both for pAPP and &,-ACT by immunofluorescence and the absence of variation by immunoblotting suggest a regulation based upon the cellular localization more than the global quantity of proteins. It is also possible that pAPP  These results allow us to speculate on the role of OAPP and the a,-ACT at the NMJ. In previous studies we found for the first time that a serpin, PNI, was highly localized to these cholinergic synapses ( FestofF et al., 199 1 ), where it might inhibit uPA or other target serine proteases in muscle  ( HantaY et al., 1990). PNI is identical to glia-derived nexin (GDN), a neurite outgrowth promotor by virtue of its thrombin-inhibiting activity (Gloor et al., 1986). PNI forms complexes with thrombin, and at least in platelets, also forms a trimolecular complex with thrombospondin (Chang and Detwiler, 1992). Thrombospondin, a major component of platelet alpha granules, is also a major component of extracellular matrices, especially in skeletal muscle (Rao et al., 1992). Thrombospondin, like a,-ACT (Abraham et al., 1988), has been found in senile amyloid plaques, in Alzheimer's disease brain tissue, where pAPP is the major constituent (Masters et al., 1985b).

Of direct relevance to cholinergic synapses and the protease/ serpin balance, agrin, an AChR aggregating protein, also contains protease inhibitor domains and is localized to the NMJ (Rupp et al., 199 1 ). We have hypothesized that components of the fibrinolytic system play key roles in the formation and maintenance of the synapse ( HantaY et al., 1988) by acting on components of the extracellular matrix. Other studies have shown that PNIIIPAPP possesses specific heparin binding sites ( Schubert   et al., 1989b) promoting binding to one of several heparan sulfate proteoglycans within the extracellular matrix (Small et al., 1992). Such molecular characteristics suggest that it might also function as an intercellular adhesion protein (Schubert et al., 1989).

Our present findings support these previous studies which suggest that DAPP (primarily the KPI-containing form) and a,-ACT, a serpin, are involved in cell-cell or cell-matrix interaction. During synaptogenesis, including growth and remodelling of synaptic membranes, they may promote and/ or maintain adhesion between the preand postsynaptic components. The synapse has been considered an important site underlying mechanisms of degeneration in Alzheimer disease for more than 20 years (see Appel and Festoff, 1971). Recent evidence has supported and extended this supposition ( DeKoskey and Scheff,  1990; Terry et al., 199 1 ) showing that synapse loss correlates better with dementia than it does the deposition of amyloid plaques or presence of neurofibrillary tangles. Since both a,-ACT and pAPP are present within senile plaques in Alzheimer's dis-ease brains, experiments in muscle such as these after denervation may help further our understanding of the mechanism of synapse loss as well as plaque deposition in this disease.

This work was supported by INSERM, CNRS, Association Franqaise contre les Myopathies ( AFM), NATO, Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association ( ADRDA), the Marion Merrell Dow Foundation/SEP, and the Medical Research Service of the Department of Veterans Affairs.

Figure 11Figure 1 Immunolocalization of pAPP in gastrocnemius muscle of normal mice and after denervation. (A, B) Normal muscle. (C, D) 4 days. (E, F) 20 days. (G, H ) 36 days after denervation. (A, C, E, and G ) Anti-PAPP. (B, D, F, and H) NMJ identified by tetramethyl-

D)], whereas the labeling was still present at NMJs [Fig. 1 (C)] . The differential staining between slow and fast muscles observed in nondenervated muscle was still present 4 days after denervation [Fig. 1 (C) shows staining of the outlines of slow muscle fibers] and disappeared thereafter. By 20 days after denervation, the staining had disappeared in some NMJs, whereas the others remained faintly labeled [Fig. 1 (E)] . At 36 days after denervation, the immunostaining for PAPP was completely absent in all NMJs [Fig. 1 (G)]. A light staining outlining the nuclei persisted with denervation.

Figure 22Figure 2 Immunolocalization of pAPP on nerve twigs and at the periphery of muscle fibers of slow skeletal muscle in addition to endplates. (A) Sarcoplasmic ATPase at pH 9.4. (B) Immunostaining of a serial section with anti-PAPP antibody (curved arrow at end plate). PAPP staining and its disappearance at nerve location (C) Normal muscle. (D) 20 days after denervation. Immunolocalization of a,-ACT within axon and perineurium in a normal control (E). Its disappearance within axons in denervated ( F) muscle section. Magnification: 230X.

Figure 33Figure 3 Immunolocalization of a,-ACT in normal and denervated gastrocnemius muscle of the mouse. (A, B) Normal muscle. (C, D) 20. (E, F) 36 days after denervation. (A, C, and E) Anti-a,-ACT. (B, D, and F) NMJ identified with tetramethyl-rhodamine a-bungarotoxin. Stained end plates, either anti-PAPP or tetramethyl-rhodamine a-bungarotoxin (curved arrows) and unstained end plate (anti-PAPP, arrow). Magnification: 230X.

Figure 44Figure 4 Immunoblots of soluble extracts from control (C) and denervated ( D ) mouse muscle. Antibody to pAPP (left) and a,-ACT (middle). Molecular markers (right). Molecular masses are indicated in kilodaltons.

Table 1 NMJs Labeled with a-Bungarotoxin in Mouse Gastrocnemius Muscle' Mean Number of NMJs Identified with Antibodies to BAPP and a,-ACT Compared to Mean Number of1Days after DenervationControl42036Number of total NMJs(a-bungarotoxinbinding)18172734NMJs labeled withanti-PAPP1817230NMJs labeled withanti-a,-ACT181000

10974695, 1994, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/neu.480250505 by University Of Illinois At Urbana Champaign, Wiley Online Library on [13/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

10974695, 1994, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/neu.480250505 by University Of Illinois At Urbana Champaign, Wiley Online Library on [13/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

