UBIQUITIN AND fl-AMYLOID-PROTEIN IN INCLUSION BODY MYOSITIS (IBM), FAMILIAL IBM-LIKE DISORDER AND OCULOPHARYNGEAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY: AN IMMUNOCYTOCHEMICAL STUDY

We used immunocytochemistry to identify ubiquitin and fl-amyloid-protein in muscle biopsies from patients with three neuromuscular disorders characterized by the presence of rimmed vacuoles in muscle fibres: inclusion body myositis (IBM), familial IBM-like disorder and oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD). Labelling with anti-ubiquitin antibodies was observed in all three diseases, but it was frequent in IBM, less common in familial IBM-like disorder and rare in OPMD. This labelling is thought to correspond to the presence of IBM-type filaments (16-18 nm in external diameter) which are characteristic but not specific for IBM or familial IBM-like disorder, as they may also occur in other diseases including OPMD. Labelling with anti-fl-amyloid-protein antibody was seen in a few fibres in IBM but not in the other two conditions. The structures labelled with this antibody have yet to be determined. Labelling with anti-ubiquitin or anti-fl-amyloid-protein antibodies was not correlated with the presence of acid phosphatase activity.

INTRODUCTION

Inclusion body myositis (IBM) is a slowly progressive muscle disorder which usually occurs sporadically [1][2][3][4]. However, many cases with identical clinico-pathological features are transmitted as an autosomal recessive trait and referred to as familial IBM-like [5][6][7]. Recently, a family with an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance has been reported [8]. Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) is an autosomal dominant disease of late onset [9][10][11][12]. These three conditions share two morphological features: (1) rimmed vacuoles within muscle fibres; and (2) tubulo-filamentous inclusions, of two different types, one type (16)(17)(18) nm in external diameter) characteristic of IBM and familial IBM-like disorder and occasionally present in OPMD, and another type (8.5 nm in external diameter) specific for OPMD [11][12][13].

The rimmed vacuoles are non-membranebound with an irregular outline and variable content, often including cytoplasmic debris and pseudo-myelin bodies [14,15]. Their ultrastructure suggests an autophagic nature [12,15].

IBM and IBM-like disorder are characterized by the presence of tubulo-filaments, 16-18 nm in external diameter, 6.5 nm in inner diameter and up to 1.5/~m in length. They have a rectilinear course, are randomly disposed, and lie in the nuclei as well as in the cytoplasm [1-5, 7, 13]. Collections of these tubulo-filaments may be found in and around rimmed vacuoles. OPMD is characterized by the presence of smaller tubulofilaments, 8.5 nm in external diameter, 3 nm in inner diameter and up to 0.25/zm in length. They are arranged in tangles or palisades and lie exclusively within the nuclei of muscle fibres [11][12][13]. The OPMD type filamentous inclusions are specific for this disease, and have not been reported in any other normal or pathological condition. IBM-type tubulofilaments, by contrast, are not specific for IBM, as they have been reported in several other neuromuscular diseases [5][6][7][8]16] including OPMD [17,18].

A. LECI..ER(' el al. Askanas et al. [19,20] reported that, in IBM, the vacuolated muscle fibres are labelled with anti-ubiquitin antibodies and anti-fl-amyloidprotein antibodies, and they showed by immunoelectron microscopy that the anti-ubiquitin antibodies decorated the IBM-type filaments while the anti-fl-amyloid-protein antibodies decorated fibrillar structures 6-8 nm in diameter.

Ubiquitin is a phylogenetically highly conserved 76 amino acid protein of 8.5 kDa found in all eucaryotic cells. Ubiquitin is an essential component of a general post-translation modification of cellular proteins in which the Cterminal carboxyl group of ubiquitin is covalently linked to an amino group of the acceptor protein by an isopeptide linkage. The ubiquitinated proteins (abnormal or short-lived normal proteins) are targeted to the cytoplasmic ATP-dependent proteolytic systems [21][22][23][24]. Ubiquitin is found in many neurodegenerative disorders, for example, ubiquitin is a component of neurofibrillary tangles and senile plaques in Alzheimer's disease [25][26][27][28][29][30][31].

The fl-amyloid-protein is a 4 kDa protein of 39-43 amino acids. It is derived from one or several members of the large amyloid precursor protein (APP) family and is thought to be released as an abnormal cleavage product of APP. It is also found in senile plaques in Alzheimer's disease [32][33][34].

We have investigated the presence and the localization of ubiquitin and fl-amyloid-protein by light microscope immunocytochemistry, in IBM, IBM-like disorder and OPMD, with the aim to better characterize the nature of these three disorders. This work demonstrates an accumulation of cytoplasmic ubiquitin in IBM, IBM-like disorder and OPMD. We have observed that only the sporadically occurring form of IBM presents a cytoplasmic fl-amyloidprotein accumulation. As typical lysosomal vacuoles possess a strong acid phosphatase activity, we looked for any correspondence between ubiquitin accumulation and acid phosphatase activity. We found no correlation between ubiquitin labelling and this enzyme activity in the three neuromuscular disorders, nor in a pathological control presenting intense acid phosphatase activity in muscle fibres.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

We studied muscle biopsies from 17 patients: 5 sporadic IBM; 2 familial IBM-like disorder; 5 OPMD; 3 normal controls; 2 polymyositis and 1 glycogenosis type II (see Table 1). The diagnosis of these diseases was based on characteristic clinical and histopathological features.

Muscle biopsy samples were frozen without fixation by quick immersion m isopentane chilled in liquid nitrogen and then stored at -80°C. Cryostat sections were studied with current histochemical reactions [14], routinely performed m our laboratory for diagnostic purposes. All biopsies were prepared for electron microscopy according to standard techniques. The typical IBM-type tubulo-filaments (16--18 nm in external diameter) [1][2][3][4] were observed in the cytoplasm in all cases of IBM and familial IBM-like disorder, and in nuclei in four cases of IBM and one case of familial IBM-like disorder. The specific OPMD-type intranuclear tubutofilaments (8.5 nm in external diameter} [11][12][13] were found in all cases of OPMD.

Immunocytochemistry was performed on 7-10 /~m cryostat transverse sections, using the following antibodies: anti-ubiquitin polyclonal antibody (Dako) at 1/100, anti-ubiquitin monoclonal antibody (Chemicon) at 1/1000 and anti-~-amyloid-protein polyclonal antibody (Boehringer) at 1/20. These antibodies were diluted in phosphate buffer saline (PBS) + 3% bovine serum albumin (BSA) and incubated for 1 h at room temperature or overnight at 4°C. These first antibodies were revealed by two methods: (1) Immunofluorescence. Cryosections were incubated at room temperature for 1 h with appropriate anti-species second antibodies: rabbit anti-mouse-rhodamine (Dako) diluted 1/20 or goat anti-rabbit-fluorescein (Tago) diluted 1/100. Each incubation was followed by extensive washing with PBS. The sections were mounted with coverslips, using moviol and Vectashield (Vector) to conserve the fluorescence. Negative controls were performed by omission of the first antibody. HoSchst 33258, a bisbenzimidazol derivative that is a DNA intercalating fluorochrome, was added in the last wash to visualize the nuclei presented in the section. Examination and photographs were made by a Zeiss-Axiophot fluorescence microscope equipped with a photomicrographic apparatus. (2) Immunoperoxidase. Polyclonal primary antibodies were revealed by 1/1000 HRP-conjugated sheep anti-rabbit (Diagnostic Pasteur). The sections were incubated with DAB (kit Zymed). Negative controls were performed by omission of the first antibody. Examination and photographs were made by a photonic microscope equipped with a photomicrographic apparatus.

Sections serial to those used for immunocytochemical techniques were either stained with haematoxylin-eosin, or processed with Barka's technique [35] to reveal acid phosphatase activity, in order to identify muscle fibres with rimmed vacuoles or other changes.

In each muscle biopsy, the percentage of fibres with rimmed vacuoles, was calculated using photomontages of complete cross-sections.

RESULTS

Frequency of rimmed vacuoles

Typical rimmed vacuoles were observed in IBM, familial IBM-like disorder and OPMD, with variable frequency. The mean frequency was 2.62% (± 1.44) in IBM, 3.05% in familial IBM-like disorder (only two cases) and 0.96% ( + 0.90) in OPMD (see Table 2).

Immunocytochemistry with anti-ubiquitin antibodies

Muscle fibres were labelled with anti-ubiquitin antibodies in all cases of IBM and IBM-like disorder, and in three of the five cases of OPMD (Fig. 1). This labelling was more frequent and more intense in IBM than in familial IBM-like disorder. It was rare in OPMD. In normal controls, polymyositis and glycogenosis, no labelled muscle fibres were found. When the first antibody was omitted no labelling was observed. The labelling was mainly localized in and around rimmed vacuoles. Not all vacuoles were labelled and there was also some variation in the size of the labelled regions from section to section. Sometimes, large portions of fibres were labelled. Phase contrast microscopy, and examination of serial sections stained by haematoxylin-eosin (Figs 2, 3) showed that some of these fibres were degenerating, but others appeared to be normal.

In OPMD, anti-ubiquitin antibodies occasionally labelled a large area of a muscle fibre (Fig. 1 g-i). A yellow autofluorescence due to lipofuscin accumulation was often found in OPMD, as is usually the case in aged persons.

Anti-ubiquitin labelling was observed with both the polyclonal (Dako) and the monoclonal (Chemicon) anti-ubiquitin antibodies, but there was more background with the polyclonal than the monoclonal antibody, particularly when using immunoperoxidase.

In the case of glycogenosis type II, numerous vacuoles were observed in muscle fibres but no accumulation of ubiquitin was found. In this case, there was a strong acid phosphatase activity in most muscle fibres. In IBM, IBM-like disorder and OPMD, only occasional fibres showed acid phosphatase activity, and it was always very weak (Fig. 2).

Immunocytochemistry with anti-fl-amyloidprotein antibody

Labelling with anti-fl-amyloid-protein antibody was observed in only two of the five IBM cases (Fig. 4). This labelling was infrequent and was found in and around rimmed vacuoles. No labelling was observed in either familial IBM-like disorder or in OPMD. When the first antibody was omitted, no labelling was observed. In the case of glycogenosis type II, numerous Fig. 1. Ubiquitin accumulation in vacuolated muscle fibres. Inclusion body myositis (IBM) (a, b, c; case 1), familial inclusion body myositis-like (IBM-like) (d, e, f; case 6) and ocutopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) (g, h, i; case 8). Phase contrast microscopy (c, f, i) of the latter sections and haematoxylin-eosin of serial sections (a, d, g) to show the regions labelled with the anti-ubiquitin monoclonal antibody by immunofluorescence (b, e. h). In IBM (b) and familial IBM-like lc), this labelling was localized in rimmed vacuoles while in OPMD (h), the labelling was less frequent but it could be seen ira a large area of a muscle fibre, x 700.

i' i~i ¸ Fig. 2. No correlation was observed between ubiquitin accumulation and acid phosphatase activity. In inclusion body myositis (a, b, c, d; case 1) the area labelled with the anti-ubiquitin polyclonal antibody by immunoperoxidase (b) shows a very faint reaction for acid phosphatase activity (c). In glycogenosis type II (e, f, g, h; case 18) no ubiquitin labelling (f) was observed but the acid phosphatase activity was strong (g). Serial sections stained by haematoxylin-eosin (a, e) and controls for the acid phosphatase activity (d, h). x 230. vacuolated muscle fibres were observed, but no deposits of fl-amyloid-protein were found.

DISCUSSION

Ubiquitin labelling in muscle fibres

Ubiquitin immunoreactive deposits were observed in and around rimmed vacuoles in the three diseases studied (IBM, familial IBM-like disorder and OPMD). In IBM and familial IBMlike disorder, rimmed vacuoles are always observed [2-5, 7, 8], while in OPMD they are often not found [12]; this may explain the frequent finding of ubiquitin deposits in IBM and familial IBM-like disorder and their rarity in OPMD.

The ubiquitin immunolabelling depends on: (1) the frequency of the vacuoles; (2) the preservation of the vacuolar contents in a given section (they can be removed during sectioning and when the vacuoles are virtually empty no labelling is found); (3) the presence of abnormal regions (apparently not vacuolated) in muscle fibres.

It is generally accepted that rimmed vacuoles are of an autophagic nature. The presence of ubiquitin accumulation, however, does not correspond with any significant increase in acid phosphatase activity. In IBM, familial IBM-like disorder and OPMD, acid phosphatase activity was non-existent or very faint in the regions where ubiquitin labelling occurred. In contra~t, in the case of glycogenosis type II, in which there were many vacuoles and numerous fibres with marked acid phosphatase activity, no labelling with anti-ubiquitin antibodies was seen. The ubiquitin accumulation observed in the three diseases studied could be explained by: (1) an increase of the synthesis of ubiquitin conjugated products; or by, (2) a decrease in the rate of degradation of ubiquitin conjugated proteins.

Ubiquitin is essential for cells to survive stress. It permits targeting of abnormal or short-lived proteins to the cytoplasmic ATP-dependent proteolytic systems.

Lowe et al. [36] suggested two schemes for the development of ubiquitinated cellular inclusions in Alzheimer's disease and other neurodegenerative diseases in which filamentous ubiquitinated inclusions are frequently observed: (1) the inclusions may be the result of proteolysis causing the accumulation of ubiquitinated protein fragments which are not further degradable;

(2) the ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis is overwhelmed by the amount of proteins targeted for degradation, giving rise to the formation of inclusion bodies.

By analogy with heat shock proteins, ubiquitin could have another role in a pathological process. Hamos et al. [37] suggested that in Alzheimer's disease, ubiquitin could "neutralize" the deleterious effects of the abnormal cytoskeletal proteins by isopeptide conjugation.

In OPMD, labelling with anti-ubiquitin antibodies may occur in abnormal regions, apparently not vacuolated, of muscle fibres. It is interesting to mention that Schwartz et al. [38] have shown that ubiquitin accumulation precedes any of the morphological or physiological changes that accompany cell death. These authors have demonstrated that the polyubiquitin gene was selectively expressed during muscle atrophy and degeneration of the intersegmental muscle of an insect (the tobacco hawkmoth). This gene was under hormonal control and was expressed independently of the heat shock response of the cell. The ubiquitin accumulation could serve as an early molecular marker for the commitment of the cell to die during development.

Correspondence between ubiquitin labelling and the different types of filamentous inclusions in IBM, IBM-like disorder and OPMD

Ubiquitin deposits similar to those described here have been reported by Askanas et aL [t9,20] who, based on immunoelectron microscopic studies, considered that they were excl~ively on the tubulo-filamentous inclusions of 16-18 nm diameter. In sporadic IBM and familial IBM-like disorder, ubiquitin accumulation may be related to the presence of these tubulo-filamentous inclusions which are always present in these diseases [1][2][3][4][5][6][7][8][9][10][11][12][13][14][15][16][17][18]. According to what is known about the nature and the function of ubiquitin, we suggest that these filaments are not composed of ubiquitin, but just decorated by this protein. This does not permit one to deduce the nature of the IBM-type filaments, but can be helpful for future studies to determine their biochemical composition.

In OPMD, by analogy with IBM and IBM-like disorder, it is likely that labelling with antiubiquitin antibodies may also correspond with the presence of cytoplasmic IBM-type filaments, as can be observed in OPMD [17, 18, unpublished personal observations].

Accordingly, although accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins is not specific for IBM, it may be related to the presence of IBM-type filaments in muscle fibres.

In OPMD, we have not found any ubiquitin labelling in muscle nuclei. This suggests that the specific OPMD-type intranuclear filaments are biochemically different from the IBM-type filaments, as could be expected from the ultrastructural observations. Further studies are necessary to determine the nature of the OPMDtype filaments.

fl-Amyloid-protein labelling in muscle fibres

Labelling with anti-l/-amyloid-protein antibody was only observed in the two cases of sporadic IBM. It was neither as frequent nor as intense as the labelling with anti-ubiquitin antibodies. This indicates that the anti-ubiquitin and anti-fl-amyloid-protein antibodies did not label the same structures in the muscle fibres. Askanas et al. [20] have reported labelling with anti-flamyloid-protein antibodies in nearly 100% of vacuolated fibres of their ten sporadic IBM and one familial IBM-like disorder cases. This difference between our results and those of these authors may be explained by differences between the antibodies and the methods used. These authors have carried out an immunoelectron microscopic study with anti-fl-amyloid-protein antibodies and reported labelling with these antibodies in short thin fibrils (6-8 nm in diameter), considered amyloid-like, lying in proximity to the typical IBM filaments [20]. It should be mentioned that Mendell et al. [39] have reported Congo red positive deposits in vacuolated fibres in IBM. Other studies are needed to further define the significant of these findings.

In conclusion, ubiquitin appears to decorate IBM-type filamentous inclusions in the three diseases studied. It will now be interesting to use biochemical assays to determine the nature of these filaments, for example, by Western blot analysis of cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions of IBM biopsied muscle. In the present study, few accumulations of fl-amyloid-protein were observed, in only two of the five cases of sporadic IBM. As they were not a constant finding in this condition and as they were not found in the other two diseases studied, they do not appear to label IBM-type filaments. This indicates that there may be biochemical and pathogenic differences between sporadic IBM and familial IBM-like disorder. However, the small number of cases of familial IBM-like disorder which were available for us to study does not permit more definite conclusions to be drawn. The absence of flamyloid-protein deposits in all five cases of OPMD, a disease with a late clinical onset, suggests that this protein is not involved in its pathogenesis.

Fig. 3 .3Fig. 3. Serial sections of an abnormal muscle fibre presenting a region with ubiquitin accumulation. Inclusion body myositis (case 2). The nuclei are not labelled. (a) Haematoxylin-eosin. (b) Immunoperoxidase (anti-ubiquitin polyclonal antibody). × 470,

Fig. 4 .4Fig. 4. Serial sections of a vacuolated muscle fibre presenting a large zone with flamyloid-protein accumulation. Inclusion body myositis (case 1). (a) Haematoxylineosin. (b) Immunofluorescence (fl-amyloid-protein polyclonal antibody), x 700.

Table 1 .1Disease, age (at biopsy), sex, biopsied muscle ,,t q~died patientsDiseaseCaseAgeSexBiopsiednumber(yr)muscleIBM sporadic119MDell.252[:Quadr367MDeh440M[)ell553MQuadrFamilial IBM-like650MBiceps725MDelt.OPMD870FSCM975FDell,1062MDelt.1169MDell.1268FDell.Normal1325MDell.1430MDell.1538FDell.Polymyositis1668MBiceps1755MDelt.Glycogenosis type II182MDelt.Delt.= Deltoid, SCM = Sternocleidomastoideus, Quadr. = Quadriceps.

Table 2 .2Percentage of fibres with rimmed vacuoles on muscle sections from patients with IBM, IBM-like and OPMDDiseaseCase number % fibres with rimmed vacuolesIBM sporadic13.621.431.44551.7Familial IBM-like60.875.3OPMD80.290.4100.4112.9120.9

