Twisted Tubulofilaments of Inclusion Body Myositis Muscle Resemble Paired Helical Filaments of Alzheimer Brain and Contain Hyperphosphorylated Tau

We immunostained muscle biopsies of 8 patients with sporadic inclusion body myositis (S-IBM), 7 patients with autosomal recessive hereditary in- clusion body myopathy (H-IBM) (both diseases being characterized by similar musclefiber vacu- oles containing inclusions), and 11 normal and disease controls. We used the folowing well- characterized antibodies against tau proteiwn Tau-1, Alz-50, and anti-paired helical filament (PHF) antiserunm By light microscopy, in aU S-IBM muscle biopsies virtualy aU vacuoles im- munoreactive for ubiquitin and jJ-amyloid pro- tein also contained inclusions immunoreactive with Alz-50 and anti-PHF antiserun. With tau-1 antibody, strong immunoreactivity in the vacu- oles was obtained only after dephosphorylation of muscle sections. By electronmicroscopy, aU three antibodies immunodecorated exclusively cytoplasmic twisted tubulofilaments (ITFs). In H-IBM, virtually aU ubiquitin and f3amyloidpositive muscle fiber vacuoles contained inclu- sions immunoreactive with anti-PHF antiserum, but in only 40% ofthosefibers were the inclusions immunoreactive with Alz-50. In six H-IBM pa- tients there were no tau-1 immunoreactive inclu- sions in any of their vacuolated musclefibers; in one patient, 24% of the vacuolated fibers had tau-l immunoreactivity. By demonstrating that hyperphosphorylated tau, which is characteris- tic of Alzbeimer brain PHFs, is a component of S-IBM-muscle TTFs (which are also ultrastructur-

ally similar to PHFs), our study: 1) provides the first demonstration of abnormaly accumulated tau in nonneural tissue and 2) suggests that the cytopathogenesis in Alzheimer brain and S-IBM muscle may share some similar mechanisms. Whether the difference in tau immunoreactivity between S-IBM and most ofthe H-IBMpatients re- flects a difference in geneticaly determined tran- scriptional orposttranslational modifications of tau protein or otherfactors remains to be deter- mined. (Am JPathol 1994, 144:177-187) Sporadic inclusion body myositis (S-IBM), the most common progressive muscle disease in patients age 55 years and older, leads to severe disability. There is proximal and distal muscle weakness, thinning of the forearms, male predominance, and often a poor or no response to immunosuppression treatment.1 2 Light microscopic features include degrees of inflammation varying from abundant to none, muscle fibers with vacuoles that contain material staining red with the modified trichrome reaction,3 and a few atrophic an- gular, pan-esterase-dark muscle fibers suggesting a denervation component.1' 24 IBM-vacuolated muscle fibers contain congo red, thioflavin-S, and crystal vio- let positivity indicative of amyloid in 3-pleated sheets.5'7 '8  Those vacuolated fibers also contain abnormally accumulated: 1) amyloid /3-protein (AP),7,8 2) NH2- and COOH-terminal regions of amyloid-/3 precursor protein (/3PP),9 3) ubiquitin (Ub),6 10 and 4) a1- antichymotrypsin (a1 -ACT).1 1 Also increased in them Supported in part by the Ron Stever and Sheldon Katz Research Funds of the USC Neuromuscular Center. Accepted for publication September 27, 1993. Address reprint requests to Dr. Valerie Askanas, USC Neuro- muscular Center, 637 South Lucas Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90017.

is pPP mRNA encoding pPP containing the Kunitz- type protease inhibitor sequence (12).

Ultrastructurally, IBM-vacuolated muscle fibers contain cytoplasmic tubulofilaments 15 to 21 nm ex- ternal and 3-to 6-nm internal diameter.1 These are actually paired helical filaments (PHFs), each ap- proximately 7 to 10 nm thick; the twist repeats have a periodicity of 41 to 55 nm (Figure 1). Therefore, we call them twisted tubulofilaments (TTFs). In the vacu- oles, immunoelectron microscopy localizes ubiquitin to TTFs,6 9'10 whereas AP3 is localized to amorphous, poorly defined structures and to 6-to 1 0-nm amyloidlike fibrils.8,9

Designated hereditary inclusion body myopathy (H-IBM) are patients with autosomal recessive115 and autosomal dominant (Engel and Askanas, un- published observations, 3 generations)16 progres- sive muscle weakness, TTFs in vacuoles of abnor- mal muscle fibers, and atrophic muscle fibers, but no inflammation in the biopsy. In their vacuolated muscle fibers they also have abnormally accumu- lated AP, NH2-, and COOH-terminals of f3PP, Ub, a1-ACT, and ,3PP mRNA. 12 However, congo red and crystal violet positivities in the H-IBM- vacuolated fibers are usually not present,8 although a minority of H-IBM patients have very small depos- its in approximately 30 to 50% of their vacuolated muscle fibers. Ultrastructural immunolocalizations of ubiquitin and A,B are the same as in S-IBM.

Figure 1. EM of S-IBM muscle cytoplasmic 7TFs demonstrates their twisted structure. Magnification X 108,000.

Pathogeneses of sporadic and hereditary IBM are not known. There is a pathological similarity between the intracellular inclusions of the two forms of IBM and the extracellular senile plaques of Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain, because both contain accumu- lations of amyloid fibrils, Ub, AP3, and a1-ACT.17-19 By immunoelectron microscopy, both the intramyofiber TTFs of IBM and the structurally similar intraneuronal PHFs of AD brain contain ubiquitin but not Af3.8,9,20

We have now asked whether tau, a prominent com- ponent of AD PHFs, is abnormally accumulated in IBM and, if so, whether it is localized to TTFs. Using both light-and electronmicroscopy immunocytochemistry we localized tau protein and in the same sections colocalized it with either Ub or A,B.

Materials and Methods Patients

Immunohistochemistry was performed on sections of diagnostic muscle biopsies (obtained with in- formed consent) from 27 patients, ages 36 to 78 years, with these diagnoses: S-IBM 8; autosomal re- cessive H-IBM 7 (from 7 unrelated families); poly- myositis 4; amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 2; normal muscle 6. The median age of IBM patients was 67 years, of non-IBM controls 65 years. Diagnosis of all patients was based on clinical and laboratory stud- ies, including 18-reaction histochemistry of the muscle biopsy.21 Biopsies of all IBM patients had muscle fibers with vacuoles containing Ub, AN, and a1-ACT immunoreactivities, and TTFs by EM.

All patients with S-IBM had crystal violet-positive (metachromatic red) and congo red-positive amy- loid inclusions in nearly all of their vacuolated muscle fibers. In three H-IBM patients there were very small congo red-positive inclusions in approximately 40% of their vacuolated muscle fibers, which because of their small size required enhancement of their congo red positivity with ultraviolet light and fluorescence filters22 for visualization. The other four H-IBM patients did not have any positive fibers, even with enhancing the congo red with fluores- cence filters.

Light Microscopic Immunocytochemistry

Immunocytochemical stainings were performed on 10-pm transverse sections of fresh frozen muscle biopsies, using peroxidase-antiperoxidase (PAP) and fluorescence methods as described.6'7'910 Four well-characterized antibodies reacting in AD brain with both normal and abnormal tau protein were used. 1) Alz-50, a mouse monoclonal antibody directed against the group of 65-to 70-kd proteins designated A68, isolated from AD brain,23 diluted 1:20. On immunoblots, Alz-50 reacts with recombi- nant human tau24 and after its absorption with nor- mal human brain reacts with A68.25 2) Tau-1, a mouse monoclonal antibody directed against non- phosphorylated tau,26 recognizing an epitope resid- ing between amino acids 189 to 207 in the central part of human tau,27 diluted 1:20-1:100. Immuno- staining with tau-1 antibody was performed without and after dephosphorylation of tissue sections. To obtain dephosphorylation, the sections were pre- treated with alkaline phosphatase (Sigma, St. Louis, type VII NL) 100 pg/ml in 0.1 M Tris-HCI, pH 8, for 3 hours at 37 C, as described for Alzheimer brain sections.28 3) 5E2, a mouse monoclonal antibody against human fetal heat stable microtubule- associated protein,29 diluted 1:20-1:100. 4) Anti- PHF, a polyclonal antiserum "Pam" against partially purified PHF, recognizes a yet unmapped epitope of tau30 diluted 1:100-1:200. To establish that in our preparations this last antiserum did not cross-react with Ub, we performed two experiments: 1) before immunocytochemical staining, PHF antiserum was absorbed with purified Ub (Sigma) and 2) PHF and Ub antisera were reacted with Ub on dot immuno- blots.

Ub was localized with 1) a monoclonal antibody (Chemicon, Temecula, CA), diluted 1:50-1:200 de- pending on the lot or 2) a rabbit polyclonal antise- rum31 diluted 1:25. AP was localized with 1) R1280, a rabbit polyclonal antiserum against sequence 1-40 of synthetic A1332 diluted 1:1000 and 2) G-OP-1, a mouse monoclonal antibody against sequence 8-17 of synthetic AP diluted 1:200. 33 The above antibod- ies were shown to be very specific in our previous studies.7-9 Double fluorescence immunolocalization using Alz-50, tau-1, or PHF antibodies combined with Ub or A,B antibody was performed using fluo- rescein isotheocyanate, Texas red, or AMCA-labeled secondary antisera as described.7, 8,34,35 Immunoelectron microscopy This was performed on 1 0-pm unfixed frozen sections adhered to the bottom of 35-mm Petri dishes.689 After incubation in a given antibody against tau pro- tein, sections were incubated in either gold-or HRP- conjugated secondary antisera, or they were pro- cessed for the PAP reaction. The sections were then fixed in a 2% paraformaldehyde 1.2% glutaraldehyde mixture, postfixed in osmium, and embedded in situ in the Petri dish, according to our method for cultured muscle.36'37 The embedded section in the dish was viewed under phase contrast microscopy and was compared with an adjacent cross-section that had been incubated with the same antibody as for EM but stained with the PAP reaction. The same vacuolated muscle fibers that contained PAP-positive inclusions were identified in the adjacent gold-labeled Epon- embedded section, marked, and 1-mm diameter cores drilled out.36'37 From the cores, each contain- ing at least one vacuolated muscle fiber, thin sections were cut, counterstained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate, and examined by EM. This method has proven reliable for EM identification of TTFs in IBM- vacuolated muscle fibers38 and for EM immunogold labeling.6'89

For EM double immunolocalization, the method was essentially the same, except that sections were incubated simultaneously in two antibodies directed against different antigens and raised in different species. This was followed by incubation in two cor- respondingly appropriate secondary antibodies, one labeled with 5 nm gold and the other with 15 nm gold particles. To avoid misinterpretation caused by possibly different penetration of different size gold particles, in each experiment duplicate studies were performed switching the size of gold particles conjugated with a given secondary anti- body.

Results

Light Microscopic Immunocytochemistry

S-IBM

Approximately 90% of AP and Ub immunoreac- tive vacuolated muscle fibers contained, within large and small vacuoles, very strongly immunore- active inclusions with Alz-50 and anti-PHF antibod- ies (Figure 2). In an occasional vacuolated muscle fiber, in addition to strong immunoreactivity within vacuoles and/or their close proximity, there was also slight, somewhat diffuse immunoreactivity in what appeared to be vacuole-free cytoplasm. Strong im- munoreactivity with tau-1 antibody was obtained only after dephosphorylation of muscle sections; without dephosphorylation, negative or only minimal staining was present (Figure 3). Immunoreactivity achieved with Alz-50, PHF, and tau-1 antibodies co- localized with Ub and AP3 (Figures 2 and 3).  2. Fluorescence microscopy immunocytochemistry ofIBM-vacuolated musclefibers. A to D and F, Alz-50 immunostaining in S-IBM. Imimunolocalization of (lb (E) and AP with R1280 (G) double labeled on the same sections as D and F, respectively. Alz-50 immunoreactive deposits are mainlv within vacuoles and rarely in uhat appears to be vacuole-free Lvtoplasm. There-is close colocalization betuween Alz-50 and [lb anld between Alz-50 and A,3 immunoreactivities. D to G, X 1200. H and 1, immunoreactive deposits uith anti-PHF antisenim in S-IBM. H, x 1075; I, X 1200. J to M, bereditary IBM. J and K, douible immunostaining uitb anti-PHF antisenimn (J) and (lb (K). M anid L, doulble immuno.staining with Alz-50 antibody(:(L) and AP with R1280 (M). J to M, X 1200. Figure 3. Fluorescence microscopy immunocytochemistry ofS-IBM-vacuolated musclefibers using tau-1 antibody. A to D, tau-I immunoreactivity without (A and C) and after (B and D)) dephosphorylation on adjacent section pairs (A,B and C,D) of tuo mtuscle fibers. The staining without dephosphorylation is either negative (A) or very weak (C). E to H, dotuble-labeling immunostainings with antibodies to tatI-1 (E) p/lts Af3 wvith G-OP-1 (F) and uith atntibodies to tau-1 (G) pluts Ub (H). Within the vactoolated muscle fibers there is close colocalization of immunoreactivities betwoeen tau-1 and AP3 and between taoI-1 and (lb. Axons uwithin ani intramuscular nerve twig are immuinoreactive with taoi-1 antibody (E) but not uith AP antibody (F). A to H, x 1250.

H-IBM

Approximately 90% of A,3and Ub-positive vacu- olated muscle fibers contained very strongly immunoreactive inclusions with the PHF antiserum. Only 40% of those fibers contained Alz-50 immunoreac- tive inclusions (Figure 2), and one H-IBM patient had many A,3and Ub-positive vacuolated fibers but no Alz-50 positivity. In six H-IBM patients, there AJPjIanuar' 1994, Vol. 144, No. 1 were no postdephosphorylation tau-1 immunoreac- tive inclusions in any of the vacuolated muscle fibers, whereas in one patient 24% of the vacuolated fibers had that immunoreactivity.

There was no 5E2 immunoreactivity in any vacuolated muscle fibers of either Sor H-IBM, despite repeated attempts.

With the above reactions, when the primary anti- body was omitted or replaced by a nonimmune se- rum, the immunoreaction did not take place. Ab- sorption of PHF antiserum with purified ubiquitin did not influence its staining intensity. There was no im- munoreactivity of PHF antiserum with Ub on dot blots.

None of the control biopsies had the tau-1, Alz- 50, or PHF immunoreactive inclusions that were characteristic of IBM-vacuolated muscle fibers.

Immunoelectronmicroscopy

Ultrastructurally, Alz-50, tau-1, and anti-PHF anti- bodies immunodecorated only TTFs (Figure 4). With Figure 4. Flectron microscopic immunocytochenmistry oJ S-IBM cvtoplasmic 7Fs. A, lou' power of tau-1 immuruoreactivitv uwith peroxidase reac- tion. The dark reaction product (above) covers the 77Fs entirely, whereas an adjacent portioni qf the myofiber (below) is not immunostained, X 20, 000. B and C, gold immunoreaction u'ith Alz-50 antibody. B, loulerpower electronimicrograph demonstrates that the 5-nm gold particles are exclusivel/V decorating TTFs, uhereas abnormal amorphouis material (lower right) is not immunostained, X 54,000. C, higherpower electronmicro- graph ofanother region illustrates the distribution of the 5-unm gold particles on TlF.s, x 101,000. D, douible imnunolocalization oftlb ( 15-uni gold particles) anid tau (u'ith Alz-50 antibodV, 5-um gold particles), x 101,000. E, anti-PHF antiseruni immunodecoratiug TTFs (15 u-rm gold). Aui ad- jacent portioni of the mnofiber on the ftir lower right is not inmmunostained, X 27,000. tau-1 antibody, positive staining was obtained only after tissue dephosphorylation. With the peroxidase method, the immunoreactivity covered the TTFs en- tirely, whereas myofibrils and other structures re- mained unstained (Figure 4). With the immunogold, some gold particles resided on the TTFs them- selves, and there were also gold particles closely adjacent to the TTFs, seemingly attached to them by thin strands (Figure 4). This localization of immu- nogold particles also exists regarding AD PHFs (per our evaluation of pictures in refs. 20 and 52).

Colocalization showed that both tau and Ub anti- gens were localized to TTFs (Figure 4).

Discussion Tau Protein in Brain PHFs

Tau protein belongs to the class of mammalian brain microtubule-associated proteins and is found primarily in neural tissue.39'40 Human brain tau is the product of a single gene whose mRNA is alter- natively spliced and variably phosphorylated to generate six isoforms,39,40 all of which are ex- pressed in adult human brain. Some of the 16 ex- ons are constitutitively expressed and some are un- der developmental regulation. Tau mRNAs have been found only in neurons.39 Normal and abnor- mally phosphorylated tau are constituents of the AD intraneuronal and extracellular PHFs.41 4 The PHF tau is hyperphosphorylated because tau-1 anti- body, which is directed against nonphosphorylated normal tau protein, binds to PHFs only after dephosphor.ylation.45 All six isoforms of brain tau are abnormally phosphorylated in AD PHFs.46 It has been postulated that abnormal phosphorylation of tau causes significant structural changes, resulting in its altered electrophoretic mobility, molecular size, and interaction with microtubules.41 '47-4  A68 proteins, ie, Alz-50 antigen, are also part of PHFs.19,50-52 Even though the exact molecular composition of A68 proteins is not fully elucidated, they have close similarities to tau of PHFs. 25,50,51,53  In addition to tau protein, PHFs also contain Ub.205455 It was recently postulated that in PHFs abnormal phosphorylation of tau precedes ubiquiti- nation. 27 In AD, it is not understood how PHFs are assembled or why they accumulate.

Tau Protein in S-IBM Muscle Fiber TTFs

Our studies indicate that TTFs in S-IBM muscle contain hyperphosphorylated tau because they were immunoreactive with an antiserum against isolated PHF, and, after tissue dephosphorylation, with tau-1 antibody. By light microscopy tau-1, PHF, and Alz-50 antibodies colocalized with both Ub and AP3; however, ultrastructurally those three immunoreac- tivities of tau were present only on TTFs where they were colocalized with Ub, but not with AP3 because TTFs do not contain A.89 We concluded that the anti-PHF antiserum used did not react with Ub in the inclusions because: 1) absorption of PHF anti- serum with Ub did not influence its staining specificity and 2) PHF antiserum did not react with Ub on dot immunoblots. Thus, our study demonstrates that another protein characteristic of AD, viz. hyperphosphorylated tau, is present in vacuolated muscle fibers of S-IBM, in addition to AP3, C-and N-f3PP, a1-ACT, and Ub. The presence of tau only on TTFs suggests its intracellular origin. However, the abnormal muscle fibers appear fragile and their surface membrane might have been transiently bro- ken, such that tau could have moved in from outside the muscle fibers. In situ hybridization studies could show whether tau mRNA is expressed within the abnormal muscle fibers, as we have demon- strated for fpp.12 We do not know whether the hy- perphosphorylated tau of S-IBM TTFs is present as the entire tau molecule or just a portion of it. The lack of immunoreactivity of S-and H-IBM vacuoles with 5E2 antibody, which reacts with a region of tau adjacent to the tau-1 site,47 may be related to the fact that this antibody is less robust on tissue sec- tions than on immunoblots (K. Kosik, personal com- munication), or perhaps 5E2 immunoreactive sites on TTFs are not accessible in our frozen prepara- tions.

H-IBM versus S-IBM

Our seven H-IBM patients were each from a differ- ent family. In six, virtually all the Ub-positive vacu- olated muscle fibers expressed PHF and AP immu- noreactivities but none had postdephosphorylation tau-1 immunoreactivity; the seventh patient had tau-1 immunoreactivity in only 24% of the Ub- positive vacuolated muscle fibers, suggesting a possible genetic heterogeneity of H-IBM. Thus, for the six H-IBM patients the structurally identical (v.i.) TTFs of H-IBM and S-IBM: 1) differ immunochemi- cally in the amino acid 189-207 region of central tau, the hyperphosphorylatible antigenic region for tau-1; but 2) are identical in the yet uncertain por- tion of tau antigenic for anti-PHF; and 3) are usually identical in the epitope of tau for Alz-50 (because only one of those six having many Ub-positive vacu- olated fibers was completely Alz-50 negative). It remains to be determined whether the difference in tau189-207 immunoreactivity of those six H-IBM pa- tients reflects 1) a genetically determined difference in tau mRNA splicing or tau protein posttranslational modification by phosphorylation, 2) a difference in the tau gene, or 3) other factors. The one H-IBM pa- tient completely lacking both tau-1 and Alz-50 immunoreactivity may have, regarding these mechanisms, a slightly different defect affecting both tau189-207 and tauAIz-50. Epigenetic factors can also be considered for the difference at tau189-207, such as putative factors associated with normal aging in muscle fibers, because all our H-IBM patients were younger than the S-IBM patients, ages 34 to 45 and 62 to 78 years, respectively.

In five of the H-IBM patients, despite strong immunoreactivity for AP3 (and for C-and N-f3PP), there was absence of congo red and crystal violet positivity, which correlated with absence of tau189-207 immu- noreactivity (two other H-IBM patients, one with no tau189-207 accumulation and another with tau189-207 in 24% of vacuolated muscle fibers, had congo red positivity in 40% of their vacuolated muscle fibers).

Thus, in those five patients, accumulation of AP3 not in (3-pleated sheets is similar to AP3 in diffuse plaques of AD.8 Speculations include: 1) A,B accumulation in the configuration of 3-pleated sheets might facilitate in- duction of the tau189-207 antigenicity, or 2) when the tau189-207 epitope in TTFs is antigenically intact and in a configuration accessible to the antibody, it might be at least partly responsible for congophilia. The fact that H-IBM does not have in the muscle biopsy any mononuclear inflammatory cells as does the early (but not the later) stage of S-IBM may be more a reflection of the etiology, perhaps viral/dysimmune for S-IBM. Despite these subtle variations in tau immunoreactivity, the muscle fiber vacuoles in H-and S-IBM are qualitatively identical in their accumulations of Ub, AP3, a1-ACT, f3PP, and 3PP-mRNA,791112 tau (by PHF antiserum), and in their ultrastructure. Ac- cordingly, in Sand H-IBM it is not known whether accumulation of one of these proteins is responsible for the others or all are unrelated collateral derivatives of a yet unknown common antecedent abnormality.

TTF Accumulation

Although the mechanisms of formation and accumulation of TTFs in vacuolated muscle fibers of Sand H-IBM are not known, we are beginning to learn their molecular composition. Tau, in addition to Ub, has now been shown to be part of S-IBM TTFs. Not only do those TTFs contain tau antigenically in- distinguishable from that in neuronal PHF, their tau is hyperphosphorylated like PHF tau. Possibilities for the yet unknown origin and molecular forms of S-IBM TTF tau include: 1) excess production of a normal tau, with hyperphosphorylation and ubiquitination being part of the normal catabolic process; 2) normal production of a normal tau, but impairment of its catabolism; and 3) production of an abnormal tau by abnormal alternative splicing or posttranslational modification, which is difficult to catabolize and readily hyperphosphorylated and ubiquitinated. There is also a possibility that tau present in S-IBM TTFs represents a new, alternatively spliced form of tau, so-called "big tau."5657

TTFs Resemble PHFs

In addition to the immunochemical similarity be- tween muscle TTFs and brain PHFs, there is striking structural similarity, both being composed of twisted helical filaments (Table 1). TTFs of Sand H-IBM are ultrastructurally identical. Their widest diameter is 15 to 21 nm, whereas that of PHFs is 15 to 22 nm.58 The twist repeat in TTFs is every 45 to 55 nm and in PHFs every 65 to 80 nm.58-60 Such subtle differ- ences could be due to different tissue processing, which is reported to cause differences in PHF size,5960 or to a subtle intrinsic difference. PHFs, al- though the most abundant in AD brain, are not dis- ease specific, being present in various neurodegen- erative brain diseases. Similarly, TTFs are most abundant in IBM, but are not absolutely specific to IBM muscle. They are also present in oculopharyn- geal muscular dystrophy (VA and RBA, unpublished observations)61 and rarely in other myopathies. In comparison to PHFs, chemical analyses of TTFs and their associated proteins are more difficult because they are much less abundant in IBM muscle than PHFs are in AD brain, making their iso- lation for detailed biochemical studies virtually im- possible. But because TTFs have been demon- strated in cultured muscle fibers of H-IBM patients,63 tissue culture studies of that muscle may prove very beneficial in elucidating their composition and pathogenesis.

This study provides: 1) the first demonstration of abnormally accumulated tau in nonneural tissue; 2) an additional pathological similarity between IBM muscle and AD brain, suggesting similar or overlapping molecular mechanisms in the cytopathology of Alzheimer brain and IBM muscle; and 3) an implied difference in tau189-207 between S-IBM and most cases of H-IBM. 

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Drs. Peter Davies, Lester I. Binder, Kenneth S. Kosik, George Glenner, and Arthur Haas for generous gifts of antibodies and to Dr. Kosik for reading the manuscript and providing helpful comments.

FigureFigure 2. Fluorescence microscopy immunocytochemistry ofIBM-vacuolated musclefibers. A to D and F, Alz-50 immunostaining in S-IBM. Imimunolocalization of (lb (E) and AP with R1280 (G) double labeled on the same sections as D and F, respectively. Alz-50 immunoreactive deposits are mainlv within vacuoles and rarely in uhat appears to be vacuole-free Lvtoplasm. There-is close colocalization betuween Alz-50 and [lb anld between Alz-50 and A,3 immunoreactivities. D to G, X 1200. H and 1, immunoreactive deposits uith anti-PHF antisenim in S-IBM. H, x 1075; I, X 1200. J to M, bereditary IBM. J and K, douible immunostaining uitb anti-PHF antisenimn (J) and (lb (K). M anid L, doulble immuno.staining with Alz-50 antibody(:(L) and AP with R1280 (M). J to M, X 1200.

Table 1 .1Comparison of MTFs and PHFsBoth Ub6 and ppP62 have been shown accumu- lated within vacuolated muscle fibers of oculopha- ryngeal muscular dystrophy. Whether the occa- sional TTFs in other muscle diseases have similar molecular properties remains to be studied.Intramyofiber IntraneuronalTTFsPHFsin S-IBMin ADReactionFor ...Ub++3PP AP Tau-1, after0 0 +0 0 +dephosphorylation With ...PHF antiserum++Alz-50 Structure++Diameter widest, nm Twist periodicity, nm15-21 45-5515-22 65-80

54. Mori H, Kondo J, Ihara Y: Ubiquitin is a component of paired helical filaments in Alzheimer's disease. Sci- ence 1987, 235:1641-1644 55. Perry G, Friedman R, Shaw G, Chan V: Ubiquitin is de- tected in neurofibrillary tangles and senile plaque neurites of Alzheimer disease brains. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1987, 84:3033-3036 56. Goedert M, Spillantini MG, Crowther RA: Cloning of a big tau microtubule-associated protein characteristic of the peripheral nervous system. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992, 89:1983-1987 57. Couchie D, Mavilia C, Georgieff IS, Liem RKH, Shelan- ski ML, Nunez J: Primary structure of high molecular weight tau present in the peripheral nervous system. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992, 89:4378-4381 58. Wisniewski HM, Merz PA, Iqbal K: Ultrastructure of paired helical filaments of Alzheimer neurofibrillary tangle. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1984, 43:643-656 59. Wischik CM, Crowther RA, Stewart M, Roth M: Subunit structure of paired helical filaments in Alzheimer's disease. J Cell Biol 1985, 100:1905-1912 60. Ruben GC, lqbal K, Wisniewski HM, Johnson Jr JE, Grundke-lqbal l: Alzheimer neurofibrillary tangles con- tain 2.1 nm filaments structurally identical to the microtubule-associated protein T: a high-resolution transmission electron microscope study of tangles and senile plaque core amyloid. Brain Res 1992, 590: 164-179 61. Coquet M, Vital C, Julieri J: Nonspecificity of inclusion body myositis-like filaments: their occurrence in oculo- pharyngeal muscular dystrophy. Ultrastructural study of ten cases. J Neurol Sci 1990, 98:179 62. Villanova M, Kawai M, Lubke U, Oh SJ, Perry G, Six J, Ceuterick C, Martin J-J, Cras P: Rimmed vacuoles of inclusion body myositis and oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy contain amyloid precursor protein and lysosomal markers. Brain Res 1993, 603:343-347 63. Alvarez RB, Fardeau M, Askanas V, Engel WK, McFer- rin J, Tome FMS: Characteristic filamentous inclusions reproduced in cultured innervated muscle fibers from patients with familial "inclusion body myositis". J Neu- rol Sci 1990, 98:178

