Strong immunoreactivity of eh-antichymotrypsin co-localizes with [ -amyloid protein and ubiquitin in vacuolated muscle fibers of inclusion-body myositis*

In 10 of 10 inclusion-body myositis (IBM) patients, including I hereditary case, vacuolated muscle fibers contained large or small cytoplasmic inclusions immunoreactive for ~l-antichymotrypsin (el-ACT). All IBM muscle biopsies had characteristic cytoplasmic tubulo-filaments by electron microscopy. None of 17 control muscle biopsies contained the ~I-ACT immunoreactive inclusions characteristic of IBM. In vacuolated muscle fibers, ~I-ACT immunoreactive inclusions colocalized with [~-amyloid protein and ubiquitin immunoreactivities. Our study provides the first demonstration of ~I-ACT accumulations in abnormal human muscle, and it suggest that, as in Alzheimer's disease and Down's syndrome, a~-ACT may be involved in the pathogenesis of IBM.

presence of cytoplasmic tubulo-filaments (CTFs), 15-21 nm in external and 3-6 nm in internal diameter, which is the ultrastructural criterion of IBM [9,12,20,30,36].

"Hereditary IBM" designates rare patients with either autosomal recessive [13,17,21] or autosomal dominant [25] progressive muscle weakness, CTFs in vacuoles of abnormal muscle fibers and atrophic muscle fibers, but usually no inflammation in the biopsy. The pathogenesis of sporadic and hereditary IBM and the origin and significance of CTFs are unknown.

Recently it has been demonstrated that vacuolated muscle fibers in IBM contain abnormal accumulations of ubiquitin (Ub) [5,6] and [3-amyloid protein (~AP) [7,8] immunoreactivities (IRs). Congo-red [22] and crystalviolet [7] positivity indicative of amyloid in the ~-pleated sheet configuration is also present in these abnormal muscle fibers. Gold immunoelectron microscopy revealed that CTFs contain strong Ub-IR [5] but not ~AP-IR [8]; [3AP-1R is localized close to CTFs but on amorphous poorly defined structures and on clusters of loosely packed amyloid-like fibrils 6-8 nm in diameter [81.

The [3AP-IR structures in vacuolated muscle fibers in IBM ultrastructurally resemble those in Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain [8,28]. Because in AD brain a serine protease inhibitor, Czl-antichymotrypsin (0h-ACT), is localized in ~AP-containing ubiquitinated amyloid plaques [1,2,26], we investigated whether in IBM muscle biopsies al-ACT is a constituent of the amyloid deposits that contain ~AP-and Ub-IR in vacuolated muscle fibers.

Materials and methods

Patients

Immunocytochemical studies were performed on sections of diagnostic muscle biopsies from patients, ages 7-75 years, with the following diagnoses: sporadic IBM, 9; autosomal-recessive heredi-tary IBM in an Iranian Jew, 1; polymyositis, 8; amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 4; Duchenne muscular dystrophy, 1; acid maltase deficiency 1; and normal muscle, 7. Median age of IBM patients was 65 years and the non-IBM controls 58 years. Diagnosis of all patients was based on clinical, laboratory, muscle-biopsy 18-reaction histochemistry [15], and ultrastructural studies. All IBM patients had CTFs by electron microscopy and inclusions immunoreactive for ~AP and Ub. All patients with sporadic IBM, but not the one with hereditary IBM, had crystal-violet-positive (metachromatic red) and congo-red-positive green-birefringent amyloid inclusions in vacuolated muscle fibers. non-immune serum, the immunoreaction did not take place. Antibody to ctl-antitrypsin and antithrombin III did not stain the cq-ACT-immunoreactive vacuolated muscle fibers.

None of the control muscle biopsies had the al-ACT-immunoreactive inclusions characteristic of IBM.

Discussion

Immunocytochemistry

Light microscopic immunocytochemistry was performed on 10-~tm transverse sections of fresh-frozen muscle biopsies, using peroxidase-antiperoxidase (PAP) and fluorescence stainings, following the general procedures as described [4,5,8,27]. The following antibodies against cq-ACT were used: (a) rabbit polyclonal antibodies from Accurate Scientific Corp., Dakopatts, ICN and Calbiochem, and (b) monoclonal antibody from Athens Research and Technology, Inc. All antibodies against ~a-ACr reacted in the concentration 1:100 to 1:500. All polyclonal antibodies were previously described as being specific for eta-ACT in studies of AD brain [1]. ~AP was localized with (a) mouse monoclonal antibody G-OP-1 directed against sequence 8-17 of [3-amyloid synthetic peptide [34], diluted 1:200; and (b) rabbit polyclonal antibody R1280 directed against sequence 1-40 of the synthetic peptide [18], diluted 1:2000. Ub was localized with a monoclonal antibody, clone 042691GS (Chemicon), diluted 1:50 or 1:100. In our previous studies [5,6,27], this antibody proved to be very specific and produced the same results as several other well-characterized monoclonal and polyclonal Ub, antibodies. Double immunolocalization of r plus ~AP, and cq-ACT plus Ub, was performed using fluorescence staining, as previously described [4,8,27].

Specificity of cq-ACT-IR was determined by: (a) omitting the primary antibody, (b) replacing the primary antibody with nonimmune serum, and (c) absorbing the primary antibody with purified cq-ACT (Calbiochem).

Rabbit polyclonal antibodies against Ctl-antitrypsin (Calbiochem) and antithrombin Ill (Calbiochem) were used as controls for identifying two other serine protease inhibitors.

Results

Vacuolated muscle fibers of sporadic and hereditary IBM biopsies contained strong Ctl-ACT immunoreactive inclusions within large and small vacuoles (Fig. 1A-D). Of the vacuolated muscle fibers containing ~AP-and Ub-IR 100 % contained Ctl-ACT-IR. In those muscle fibers, UB-IR and I3AR-IR co-localized closely with each other [7,8] and with al-ACT-IR (Fig. 1E-L). In all biopsies, muscle cytoplasm and sarcolemma were only faintly stained with anti-oh-ACT.

At a given cross-sectional level, in hereditary IBM the inclusions tended to be larger and single, while in sporadic IBM they were often small and multiple throughout the fiber (Fig. 1). In the hereditary IBM biopsy, some muscle fibers contained a strong, wide subsarcolemmal ctl-ACT-IR that extended to the interior of the fiber.

In the vacuolated muscle fibers, all ctl-ACT antibodies gave the same immunolocalization.When the primary antibody was omitted, absorbed or replaced by a C~a-ACT is a specific inhibitor of serine proteases and belongs to the serpin superfamily (reviewed in [10]). It forms stable complexes with chymotrypsin, cathepsin G and mast cell chymases [23,31,32]. Even though the physiologic functions of cq-ACT are not well understood, it is considered a major acute-phase protein associated with inflammatory episodes because its concentration in plasma greatly increases after surgery, burn injuries and other acute events (reviewed in [32]). Other proposed functions of oh-ACT involve control of connective tissue breakdown and cell-cell interaction, since it has been found to decrease proteoglycan and fibronectin and to inhibit activity of natural killer lymphocytes [32]. Even though oh-ACT has been found in a variety of tissues (reviewed in [32]), including normal human brain [19], its localization in skeletal muscle has not been reported to our knowledge.

Our present study demonstrates that ~I-ACT is a component of the [3AP-containing amyloid deposits in the vacuolated muscle fibers of patients with IBM. This finding provides one more similarity, in addition to [~AP and Ub accumulation [5][6][7][8], between the pathology of IBM muscle and AD brain, and it suggests that the pathogenic mechanism(s?) of both diseases may have commonalities. For example, in AD cerebral cortex, al-ACT is associated with ~AP deposits in two types of plaques [26]: (a) typical Congo-red-positive senile plaques composed mainly of 8-to 10-nm-diameter amyloid fibrils and dystrophic neurites, and (b) so-called "diffuse", "pre-amyloid" or amorphous plaques that are Congo-red-negative and do not contain typical amyloid fibrils [29,35]. The latter Congo-red-negative but ~APpositive plaques are considered to be an early pathologic change. Association of cq-ACT with amyloid deposits containing ~AP is considered specific for AD, since amyloid deposits in other neurodegenerative diseases, including Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease, did not contain at-ACT-IR [2].

In addition to the immunolocalization of al-ACT in AD brain, mRNA of c~I-ACT has also been found in AD brain, indicating that ACT is locally synthesized [1]. Since an increased amount of al-ACT-IR in the more affected areas of the AD brain corresponded to an increased amount of al-ACT mRNA there, the increased al-ACT-IR in AD brain was considered to reflect locally increased synthesis [1]. al-ACT mRNA has not yet been studied in IBM muscle.

The function of al-ACT in AD brain is not understood, but because of its tight association with ~AP and its presence in pre-amyloid plaques it has been proposed to play a role in amyloid fibril formation [1,2,26]. Even though IRs of the serine proteases cathepsin D and cathepsin B, and their enzymatic activities, are increased in AD brain [11], it is not certain how this relates to al-ACT increase, since those two cathepsins are not considered to be inhibitable by ACT [31][32][33]. However, recent demonstration that cathepsin G may be involved in the degradation of the ~-amyloid precursor protein [3] may be directly relevant to al-ACTaccumulation since it is inhibitable by ACT. Clipsin, a novel serine protease that is inhibitable by at-ACT, has been found in normal rat brain [24], but is possible presence and role in normal human and AD brain, or in human normal or IBM muscle, are not known. In IBM muscle the "target" and role of as-ACT remain unidentified.

As in AD brain, in IBM muscle at-ACT-IR colocalizes closely with RAP-IR. (In hereditary IBM, abnormal muscle fibers had at-ACT-and ~AP-positive accumulations; but because they were crystal-violet and Congo-red negative they apparently did not contain amyloid in R-pleated sheets, and therefore may represent early changes of IBM analogous to the early diffuse Congo-red-negative plaques in AD brain that are also at-ACT-, ~AP-and Ub-positive [26]). In contrast to AD brain where they are extracellular, the al-ACT-plus-pAP accumulations are found deeply internal within some muscle fibers, suggesting an intracellular localization. Whether in IBM muscle at-ACT is localized ultrastructurally to exactly the same structures as RAP awaits evaluation. Future studies involving Northern blot and in situ hybridization analyses of mRNA of al-ACT and RAP are also required to determine the precise origin and pathogenic steps of the abnormal accumulation of those proteins in IBM muscle. Also remaining to be elucidated is whether the accumulation of as-ACT in IBM muscle fibers(a) is secondary to an increase of its target protease (yet undefined in this pathologic situation) or (b) represents an independent cellular event.

The presence of inflammatory cell infiltration in sporadic IBM biopsied muscle raises the possibility that an inflammatory reaction might be responsible for the at-ACT increase.

However, this does not seem likely because (a) our hereditary IBM muscle also contained large pathologic accumulations of as-ACT but inflammation was not present, and (b) control muscle from patients with polymyositis had strong inflammatory reactions but no abnormal accumulations of at-ACT in the muscle fibers.  Even though the origin of increased al-ACT in sporadic and hereditary IBM muscle and the role that it plays in the cascade of pathologic events are not known, our finding provides new information that should be of the pathogenic importance.

Acknowledgements. We are grateful to Dr. George G. Glenner for the generous gift of the [3AP monoclonal antibody and to Dr. Denis J. Selkoe for the generous gift of the ~AP polyclonal antibody.

* Supported in part by the Norma Bard Research Fund. M.B. is a Research Postdoctoral Fellow

(

Fig.Fig. 1A-L. Light microscopic immunocytochemistry of inclusionbody myositis (IBM) muscle biopsies. A-D cq-antichymotrypsin (ACT) immunoreactivity in vacuolated muscle fibers of sporadic (A-C) and hereditary (D) IBM. E-H Double immunostaining for al-AC-T with Texas red (E,G) and ubiquitin with green FITC (F-H). l-L Double immunostaining for cq-ACT with green FITC (I,K) and ~AP withTexas red (J,L).There is close to co-localization between cq-ACT and ubiquitin in E-H and cq-ACT and [3AP in I-L. A,B,E-L Fluorescence staining; C,D peroxidase-antiperoxidase reaction

