Inclusion body myositis: clinical and histopathological features of 36 patients

Thirty-six patients (15 females, 21 males) with inclusion body myositis (IBM) were studied. The diagnosis was established according to clinical and histopathological criteria. Clinical features were insidious onset of slowly progressive muscle weakness and wasting-with depressed or absent tendon reflexes especially in the lower limbs. The pattern of muscle weakness was variable. The majority of patients (58%) showed proximal and symmetrical weakness usually most prominent in the legs. Isolated distal (6%) and asymmetrical weakness (19%) was less frequently observed. Myalgia occurred in 42% of the patients. The age at onset of symptoms ranged from 20 to 73 years (mean 47 years). Serum creatine kinase levels were normal (11%) or mildly elevated (89%). Needle electromyography revealed myopathic features in about 80% of the patients, and results of nerve conduction studies were normal in most of the cases. The predominant histopathological findings were numerous muscle fibers with rimmed vacuoles (100% of the patients), groups of atrophic fibers (92%), and inflammatory infiltrates (89%). The inflammatory infiltrates were located predominantly at endomysial sites and were composed mainly of T8 cells. Electron microscopy showed characteristic intracytoplasmic filamentous inclusions in all 36 cases. Immunosuppressive treatment in 16 patients failed to prevent disease progression in all but one patient with an associated Sj6gren's syndrome. It is concluded that the consistent combination of typical histopathological findings and characteristic clinical features offers a firm basis for the diagnosis of IBM. IBM should be suspected in any adult patient presenting with clinical signs of a chronic polymyositis unresponsive to immunosuppressive therapy. The etiology and pathogenesis of IBM remain to be established.

It is now generally accepted that inclusion body myositis (IBM) is a distinct entity among the idiopathic inflammatory myopathies, which encompass polymyositis, dermatomyositis, and inclusion body myositis [13,25,61]. In 1967 Chou [9] described inclusion bodies in muscle biopsy specimens of a patient clinically presenting as chronic polymyositis. The term IBM was first used by Yunis and Samaha [63] for a slowly progressive neuromuscular disorder characterized histologically by the presence of "rimmed vacuoles" in a subsarcolemmal and/or intracytoplasmic position within skeletal muscle fibers. At the ultrastructural level intracytoplasmic and/or intranuclear filamentous inclusions were regarded as the hallmark of the disease.

IBM is frequent in North America where it may represent up to 28% of all inflammatory myopathies [39]. In addition to several case reports of IBM (for review see 10,35), some larger series focusing on clinicopathological aspects of IBM have been reported by American authors [6,7,11,15,17,53]. Lotz et al. [39] studied 40 cases of IBM and concluded that it is a distinct entity in which characteristic clinical and histopathological features are consistently associated. According to their investigation, the characteristic clinical findings are: insidious onset of slowly progressive, painless, proximal muscle weakness with relatively early depression of the patellar reflex resulting from severe weakness of the quadriceps muscle, normal or mildly elevated serum creatine kinase (CK), EMG abnormalities consistent with inflammatory myopathy, and lack of response to prednisone treatment. Furthermore, there was no evidence for a hereditary muscle disorder in their patient population. The presence of the following histopathological features is necessary for the diagnosis of IBM : at least one rimmed vacuole per low-power field, at least one group of atrophic fibers per low-power field, an inflammatory infiltrate predominantly at endomysial sites, and demonstration of the typical filamentous inclusions by electron microscopy.

Clinicopathological studies by European authors have mostly been case reports [8,23,24,26,29,32,34,38,45,54,58] and some smaller series [20,36,43,55]. Mhiri and Gheradi [43] reported nine patients with rimmed vacuoles in skeletal muscle, five of whom were classified as IBM, representing 16% of adult idiopathic inflammatory myopathies in their laboratory.

In the present study, clinical, electrophysiological, and histopathological findings in 36 patients with IBM were analyzed to assess the applicability of the above diagnostic criteria. Furthermore, current knowledge about treatment and pathogenesis of the disease is reviewed.

Patients and methods

Patients

Thirty-six patients were diagnosed between 1982 and 1992 as having IBM according to the clinical, electrophysiological, and pathological criteria as proposed by Lotz et al. [39]. Clinical and electrophysiological information about the patients were collected from the medical records, which were critically reviewed concerning the following criteria: detailed history with special reference to onset and duration of symptoms at the time of diagnosis, family history, distribution and severity of muscle weakness and atrophy, associated symptoms (i.e., myalgia, paresthesia, dysphagia), and associated autoimmune diseases. Sixteen patients treated by immunosuppressants were followed for 6 months-4 years (mean 19.4 months). Follow-up examinations were performed every 6 months. In six of these patients muscle strength was also measured, using a tensiometrical method [1].

Muscle biopsy, histochemistry, and immunocytochemistry

Open biopsies were taken from the biceps, quadriceps, or tibialis anterior muscle under local anesthesia. The muscle specimens were flash-frozen at -160°C in isopentane chilled by liquid nitrogen and were stored under liquid nitrogen for subsequent studies. The following stainings and cytochemical reactions were performed on 10-~tm cryostat serial cross-sections: hematoxylin and eosin, modified Gomori trichrome, NADH dehydrogenase, acid phosphatase, myoadenylate deaminase, ATPase at pH 9.4, 4.6, 4.2, periodic acid-Schiff reagents, oil red O, succinate dehydrogenase, cytochrome oxidase, and phosphofructokinase [16]. For ultrastructural studies biopsy specimens were fixed in 5% glutaraldehyde in 0.2 mol cacodylate buffer and embedded in epon C [16]. The biopsy specimens of 12 patients were studied immunocytochemically using an immunoperoxidase technique: 6-~tm cryostat serial cross-sections were incubated for 60 min at room temperature with the following monoclonal antibodies obtained from Becton-Dickinson (Mountain View, CA): Leu 4 (CD 3, all peripheral T cells), Leu 3 (CD 4, Thelper/inducer cells), Leu 2 (CD 8, T cytotoxic/ suppressor cells, some natural killer cells), Leu 11 (CD 16, natural killer cells), Leu 14 (CD 22, all peripheral B cells), Leu M-3 (CD 14, makrophages), HLA-DR (MHC II, B cells, makrophages, activated T cells), HLA-ABC (MHC I, endothelial cells, macrophages). The immunocytochemical procedure was performed according to the method described in detail by Arahata and Engel [2]. Positive reaction for a surface antigen consisted of a rim of the reaction product around the cell. For quantitation, several mononuclear cell accumulations at endomysial sites in specimens of five patients were analyzed. The total number of mononuclear cells at endomysial sites was counted in the Gomri trichrome stained section of each patient. Subsequently, mononuclear cell subsets were counted in the immunoreacted consecutive sections [2].

Laboratory studies

Serum levels of CK, aldolase, lactate dehydrogenase, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and routine blood and urine tests were obtained in all patients. The following immunological studies were performed in 22 patients: complement studies, rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, anti-native DNA antibodies, anti-thyreoglobulin antibodies, anti-microsomal antibodies, immunoglobulins IgG, IgA, IgM, IgE, and serum/urine paraprotein bands.

Results

Clinical data

The age at onset of symptoms ranged from 20 to 73 years (mean 47 years). The duration of symptoms before biopsy diagnosis varied from 1 to 15 years with an average of 6.1 years. There was a slight male predominance in our patient population (male:female ratio 1.4: l). There was no evidence of a hereditary neuromuscular disease. Associated autoimmune disease occurred in one patient who was diagnosed as Sj6gren's syndrome. None 

Laboratory studies

Serum CK levels varied from 44 to 988 U/1 with a mean of 279 U/I. CK was normal in four patients (11%) but was mildly or moderately elevated in the other patients (Fig. 1). 

Electrophysiology

Needle EMG and motor and sensory nerve conduction studies were performed in all patients. Both distal and proximal muscles of upper and lower limbs were examined in each patient. EMG findings were abnormal in all 36 cases. In the vast majority of patients (29/36, 81%) myopathic EMG patterns were observed, that is, motor unit potentials of short duration and small amplitude and a full interference pattern. Only two patients (5%) had neurogenic EMG changes, consisting of long duration and high amplitude motor unit potentials and reduced interference patterns. Most of the long duration potentials were also polyphasic. Abnormal spontaneous activity (i.e., fibrillation potentials, positive sharp waves, and/or complex repetitive discharges) occurred in all patients. In five patients (14%) there was a mixed pattern of both myopathic and neurogenic changes with both short-and long-duration potentials in the same muscle. Nerve conduction studies were normal in all but three cases: in one patient sensory nerve conduction velocity of the ulnar nerve showed mild slowing. Motor nerve conduction velocities were normal. In another case there was a prolonged distal latency of the median nerve, and the patient with associated Sjtgren's syndrome showed mild slowing of sensory nerve conduction velocities.

Histopathology

The light microscopic features are listed in Table 2.

The pathological findings were regarded as significant for the disease only when they were observed frequently and represented predominant changes. The characteristic and most frequent histopathological features were numerous fibers with vacuoles in a subsarcolemmal or intracytoplasmic position rimmed or lined by granular, basophilic material (Figs. 2 A, 3 A), groups of atrophic fibers (Fig. 2 B), and inflammatory infiltrates located predominantly at endomysial sites (Fig. 3 C). Accumulations of the inflammatory cells at perimysial and perivascular sites were rare. Monoclonal antibody analysis of mononuclear endomysial cells in five patients revealed a T cell predominance (65.6 +_4.5% of all mononuclear cells; Fig. 3  plasm usually near to the whorls of cytomembranes (Fig. 4 A, B). The rimmed vacuoles seen by light microscopy corresponded to these whorls of cytomembranes. In addition, the filaments were often surrounded by other cytoplasmic degradation products, i.e., myeloid structures and glycogen granules. As previously described [39,44], the filaments were curved or rectilinear in shape, measuring 15 19 nm in diameter.

Therapy

Sixteen patients were treated with prednisone for at least 6 months. The initial dose level consisted of 80-100 mg/day for 6-8 weeks. Subsequently the dosage was gradually tapered over a period of 6 months following an alternate-day program [25].

A maintenance dose consisted of 10-15 mg every second day. Seven patients received an additional trial of azathioprine (150 rag/day) for at least 6 months. The majority of patients reported only some slight temporary improvement of muscle strength. However, there was no objective response to therapy. Based on clinical follow-up examinations and testing of muscle strength the disease was slowly progressive in all but one treated patient. The patient with associated Sj6gren's syn- drome showed an excellent response to a treatment protocol consisting of prednisone and azathioprine for more than 2 years after initiation of therapy. Within 3 months CK levels had decreased from 693 U/1 to normal and muscle strength had improved. In four other patients serum CK levels transiently decreased significantly without concomitant clinical improvement. CK levels in these five patients ranged from 144 to 988 U/1 (mean 597 U/l) before initiation of treatment and decreased after 6-12 weeks to a mean of 195 U/1 and subsequently increased again during the following months. In the rest of the treated patients serum CK levels varied from 44 to 260 U/1 (mean 123 U/l) and showed no significant decrease during therapy, whereas in the 20 untreated patients CK levels ranged between 67 and 713 U/1 (mean 285 U/l).

Discussion

Clinical features

The main clinical features of inclusion body myositis are the slow progression of symmetrical and mainly proximal muscle weakness and atrophy, the occasional occurrence of asymmetrical and distal weakness, lack of response to prednisone therapy, normal or mildly elevated serum CK levels, and in contrast to polymyositis and dermatomyositis a less frequent association with systemic autoimmune diseases. Essentially, the clinical features of our patients did not differ from the largest series of patients recently described [39]. In the present study the average age at onset was 47 years, and a slight male predominance was observed (male: female ratio 1.4: 1). This is consistent with previous series [7,11,15,29,43,44,53], although onset after the age of 50 years and male predominance were more common in the patients described by Lotz etal. (male:female ratio 3:1) [39]. The long duration (mean 6.1 years) between onset of symptoms and definite diagnosis reflects disease chronicity and difficulties in establishing the diagnosis of IBM. Myalgia occurred in 42% of our patients, being more frequent than described before [39,44,53], and did not respond to corticosteroid therapy. Facial weakness, occurring in the present series in 11% of the cases, was also rare in other reported patients with IBM [44,53]. Consistent with previous studies, cranial nerve abnormalities and extraocular muscle involvement were not observed.

Dysphagia was rare in our patients (14%), although it has been described to be present in up to 40% of the cases with IBM [9,10,26,29,39,53]. The dysphagia might be caused by cricopharyngeus muscle involvement and has recently been reported in patients with IBM. Recognition of severe dysphagia is important since appropriate surgical treatment via cricopharyngeus myotomy may improve this symptom [14,39,59].

The pattern of muscle weakness was proximal and symmetrical in 58% of our patients. Severe weakness was almost always associated with muscular wasting. An asymmetrical distribution of weakness and involvement of both proximal and distal muscle groups of the same patient was common (Table 1). Usually the weakness was greatest in the legs, commonly associated with depression of lower limb deep tendon reflexes. These findings are consistent with data from 40 patients with IBM, where the relatively early depression of patellar reflexes was emphasized [39]. Weakness of dis-tal muscles has been described in IBM [6,7,11,15,17,26,39,44,53]. Of our patients 42% showed involvement of distal muscles, but in the majority proximal weakness was greater than that of distal muscles, and only two patients (6%) presented with isolated distal weakness. Essentially, these observations are consistent with the findings of Lotz et al. [39]. Of their patients 48% presented with some distal weakness, but proximal weakness was found in 90%, and distal weakness was as great or greater than proximal weakness in only 35% [39]. Thus, the clinical picture of IBM, in which muscle weakness and atrophy develop and progress slowly, may resemble chronic polymyositis or limb girdle muscular dystrophy. Especially when the weakness is asymmetrical or distal, and CK levels are not increased, IBM may also mimic lower motor neuron syndromes.

In the present series, levels of serum CK and other serum muscle enzymes were normal or mildly to moderately elevated. CK levels above 1000 U/1 were never observed, and 11% of our 36 patients showed normal CK values. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was normal in 95% of cases. These data are consistent with previously reported studies [6,11,39,44,53] indicating that extensive laboratory investigations are not helpful in establishing the diagnosis of IBM.

IBM is associated with systemic autoimmune disease in up to 15% of the cases including idiopathic interstitial pneumonitis, psoriasis, dermatomyositis, systemic lupus erythematosus, chronic immune thrombocytopenia, and rheumatoid arthrifts [11,34,39,42,51,62]. Although four out of 22 tested patients (18 %) showed some abnormal immunologic laboratory values, in only one patient was Sj6gren's syndrome diagnosed as a possible associated autoimmune disease. Thus, the incidence of associated autoimmune diseases in our patients with IBM is lower than that reported by Lotz et al. [39]. There are only two other reported cases of IBM associated with Sj6gren's syndrome [8,22], and these patients did not respond to immunosuppressive treatment. The authors suggested that immune mechanisms may play an important role in the pathogenesis of IBM. Lotz et al. [39] reported six patients who were suffering from a malignancy, but in only two of them was there a close temporal association with IBM. None of our patients showed evidence of a malignant disease. Family history was unremarkable in all patients. The vast majority of reported patients with IBM showed no evidence for a hereditary neuromuscular disease. However, familial cases of IBM have been reported, suggesting autosomal recessive [3,40] or autosomal dominant inheritance [46]. Furthermore, the description of familial cases of IBM with childhood onset [17,41,52] and a familial IBM with associated leukoencephalopathy [12] indicates that there is a genetic heterogeneity of the disease.

Electrophysiological features

Neurogenic features in some cases of IBM have been described in detail according to electrophysiological and muscle and nerve biopsy investigations [6,7,11,15,17,29,33,37,53]. The vast majority of our patients (81%) showed myopathic changes on EMG examination indicating a primary myopathy, while clearly neurogenic abnormalities were detected in only two cases (5%). In addition to these observations, motor and sensory nerve conduction velocities and sensory nerve action potential amplitudes were normal in most cases, arguing against a concomitant neuropathy in IBM. However, these electrophysiological data do not exclude a neurogenic element in some cases. Five patients (14%) had mixed neurogenic and myopathic EMG abnormalities in single muscles, a pattern previously regarded as suggestive of IBM [28]. The presence of mixed myopathic and neurogenic potentials accompanied by abnormal spontaneous activity has been demonstrated in about one-third of IBM patients in a detailed electrophysiological investigation of 30 patients with IBM, while 57% of these cases showed myopathic abnormalities and in only 7% of the patients solely neurogenic EMG changes were observed. Of these cases 33% showed some slowing of nerve conduction velocities [28]. Eisen et al. [17] found electromyographic signs of axonal neuropathy in about 30% of their IBM patients. Thus, IBM shows heterogeneous electrophysiological features which might be nonspecific because similar EMG patterns have been observed in patients with chronic polymyositis [39]. Although most of the electrophysiological findings in IBM indicate a myopathy, some of the reported features suggest a neurogenic component as well.

Histopathological features

As noted in previous studies [6,11,20,39,43,44,53], the histological hallmarks of IBM in our patients were rimmed vacuoles in numerous muscle fibers, grouped fiber atrophy with some angulated fibers, and mononuclear cell infiltrates consisting predominantly of T8 lymphocytes. These cells were located mainly at endomysial sites (75% of the patients) and less marked at perimysial (28% of the patients) and perivascular sites (19% of the patients). Further morphological features included a marked variation in fiber size (fiber diameter from 5 to 220 txm), frequently occurring necrotic fibers undergoing phagocytosis, and degenerating or regenerating muscle fibers. In addition to the occasionally observed electrophysiological features of denervation, some morphological findings further support a neurogenic element of the disease (i.e., grouped fiber atrophy and small dark or small angulated fibers, seldom target fibers). The presence of muscle fiber hypertrophy and the relatively high proportion of small angulated fibers appears to be an important histopathological feature in muscle biopsies from IBM patients, probably reflecting the chronic course of the disease [60]. The immunopathologic findings support the notion that the inflammatory reaction in IBM represents a T cell mediated immune response resulting in muscle fiber injury as previously demonstrated for IBM and polymyositis [2,8,19,20,53]. Electron microscopy revealed characteristic filamentous inclusions in the cytoplasm. The vacuoles appear to be filled with granular material which on electron microscopy consists of myeloid structures and membranous whorls. The presence of more than one rimmed vacuole and more than one group of atrophic fibers per low-power field together with an endomysial inflammatory infiltrate is thought to be predictive of the presence of typical filamentous inclusions in 93% of the cases [39]. However, the IBM type of filamentous inclusions may not be entirely specific of the disease because they may occasionally be observed in various other neuromuscular disorders [21,43,44].

Pathogenesis

The cause of IBM is unknown. The rare association with other systemic autoimmune diseases in some cases and the evidence for a T cell mediated cytotoxicity suggest that autoimmune mechanisms might play an important role in the pathogenesis of IBM. Detailed monoclonal antibody analysis of mononuclear cells in myopathies has led to the conclusion that antigen-specific, MHCrestricted T cell mediated cytotoxicity is part of the immune effector response in IBM and polymyositis [2,18,19]. This conclusion is supported by the presence of autoinvasive T8 cells which along with macrophages initially surround nonnecrotic muscle fibers and eventually invade and destroy these fibers. It has been suggested that the autoinvasive T8 cells had previously been sensitized to an antigen associated with the muscle fiber surface membrane. In addition to these findings, it has been demonstrated that muscle fibers either next to or remote from the inflammatory infiltrates express the class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC-I) antigen [20,31] (Fig. 3D). Since cytotoxic T cells recognize antigens in association with MHC-I antigen, these observations suggest that in IBM and polymyositis the primary immunopathologic mechanism is mediated by cytotoxic T cells and is restricted to MHC-I antigen. However, factors or agents that trigger MHC-I antigen expression as well as the putative target antigen recognized by T cells are still undefined. Because sarcolemmal MHC-I expression can also be demonstrated on regenerating muscle fibers in various myopathies [20,31], increased MHC-I expression may not be the primary mechanism in activation of cell-mediated cytotoxicity. Furthermore, the presence of perivascular B and T4 cells might indicate stimulation of antibody-secreting B cells by T helper cells and hence point to an additional humoral mechanism in the pathogenesis of IBM and polymyositis [19].

The nature of the filamentous inclusions and the mechanism of rimmed vacuole formation remain unclear. It has been speculated that viruses are involved in the pathogenesis of IBM [9,10,26,32,44,45] and might represent a possible triggering agent for the immune response in IBM. The view that the filamentous inclusions represent mumps viral particles [9,10] was rejected by subsequent studies [30,47,50]. The role of altered intracellular proteins for rimmed vacuole formation has been emphasized in recent studies; the presence of strong ubiquitin immunoreactivity localized to the cytoplasmic filamentous inclusions led to the hypothesis that accumulation of ubiquitin is involved in the pathogenesis of IBM. The ubiquitinmediated turnover pathway is important for targeting a selective breakdown of abnormal or shortlived normal proteins and may play a role in modification of cellular proteins [4,5]. Furthermore, there is evidence that lysosomal proteinases are increased in muscle biopsies of patients with IBM [27]. Strong immunoreactivity of the lysosomal proteinase cathepsin L localized to rimmed vacuoles indicates that cathepsin L is involved in the degeneration of muscle fibers, and that rimmed vacuole formation might be the result of autodigestion of myofilaments [27]. However, this finding is not confined to muscles of IBM patients and may also be present in other myopathies associated with rimmed vacuoles [27]. Rimmed vacuoles also stain for Congo red and contain green-birefringent intracellular amyloid deposits, suggesting that the IBM type of inclusions share properties with amyloid proteins, which might indicate an accumulation of an altered protein synthesized within the cell [42]. Another interesting aspect is that the filaments in IBM resemble prion proteins. Therefore, a possible relationship of IBM to human prion disorders has been discussed [42]. However, the significance of these findings is at present uncertain, and the etiology of IBM remains undefined.

Treatment

Our results confirm previous reports that corticosteroid therapy as well as azathioprine is ineffective in IBM [7,15,35,39,44,53]. However, immunosuppressive therapy may be helpful in some patients, especially if there is evidence of an associated systemic autoimmune disease [34,62]. In the present study the patient with associated Sj6gren's syndrome showed a remarkable response to immunosuppressive treatment. However, a temporary or even sustained improvement in clinical symptoms has been described in some patients without any associated autoimmune diseases [11,29]. Lotz et al. [39] analyzed data on 29 patients who had prednisone therapy for 3 months with at least 40 mg/day. They observed improvement in muscle strength and decreasing CK levels in only one patient after 5 months. Twenty-five of these patients followed for 2 or more years showed chronic progressive weakness despite therapy. Because some patients do improve on immunosuppressive treatment, at least one trial of prednisone or a combined therapy consisting of prednisone and azathioprine should be conducted. However, the number of reported IBM patients who have received immunotherapy is still small, and controlled therapeutic trials are pending. Alternative agents which might be considered for therapy are methotrexate, cyclosporin, cyclophosphamide, and high-dose intravenous immunoglobulin.

Differential diagnosis

The differential diagnosis between IBM and other slowly progressive neuromuscular disorders may be extremely difficult. Essentially, the differential diagnosis comprises chronic forms of polymyositis, sporadic forms of limb girdle muscular dystrophy, spinal muscular atrophy, and motor neuron diseases. The clinical differential diagnosis of idiopathic inflammatory myopathies includes myopathies associated with malignomas, myopathies due to infections of muscle, late-onset congenital myopathies, polymyalgia rheumatica, and metabolic, toxic or endocrine myopathies [25] 

Acknowledgement. The excellent technical assistance of Mrs.

Karen Tolksdorf is gratefully acknowledged.

FigFig. 4A, B. Electron micrographs showing intracytoplasmic filamentous inclusions in IBM. A Mass of abnormal filaments in the cytoplasm (original magnification x 7000). B Rimmed vacuoles consisting of a conglomeration of myelin figures and some filamentous inclusions surrounded by myelin figures and cytoplasmic degradation products. Left, normal myofibrils (original magnification x 7000)

Table 1 .1Clinical features of 36 patients with IBM at the time of diagnosis12Symptomsn%Weakness Atrophy Myalgia35 30 1597 83 4210 tJ 8 c k~Paresthesia514"SDysphagia Facial weakness5 414 11.o E D6Deep tendon reflexes (reduced or absent)z4Upper limbs1233Lower limbs33922Pattern of weakness and atrophyProximal Distal21 258 600100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000Proximal/distal1336Serum-CK [IU/L]Asymmetrical719Fig. 1. Serum CK levels in 36 patients with IBM. The normalvalues were below 80 U/1 in males and below 70 U/1 in females.Four patients had normal CK valueshad stigmata of malignancy. The clinical findingsat the time of diagnosis are summarized in Table 1.The depressed tendon reflexes correlated well withthe severity of muscle weakness and atrophy. Themajority of patients had proximal and symmetricalweakness, usually greatest in the lower limbs. Onlyseven patients had asymmetrical weakness in thearms and/or legs. Facial weakness was rare (11%).Myalgia occurred in 42% of the cases, and fivepatients were suffering from dysphagia. Only fivepatients complained of numbness and paresthesiain distal parts of their limbs.

Table 22. Histopathologic features in muscle biopsies of 36 pa-tients with IBMHistologyn%Variation in fiber size36100Fibers with rimmed vacuoles36100Atrophic fibers3392Inflammatory infiltrates3289Endomysial sites2475Perimysial sites928Perivascular sites619Connective tissue proliferation2981Muscle fiber degeneration2569Central nuclei2364Small dark fibers1747Small angulated fibers1336Muscle fiber regeneration1542Grouping of fiber types514Target fibers38

. The histological hallmark of IBM (rimmed vacuoles) • occasionally occurs in other neuromuscular dis- orders. For example, rimmed vacuoles can occa- sionally be observed in neurogenic muscle atrophy, Kugelberg-Welander disease, congenital myopath- ies, and metabolic myopathies [21, 44]. In addition to IBM, they are frequently found in oculopharyn- geal dystrophy and various distal myopathies. Sim- ilarly, the characteristic filamentous inclusions have also been reported in various neuromuscular disorders, especially in several distal myopathies and oculopharyngeal dystrophy [21, 37, 41, 44, 48, 49, 56, 57].

