Rimmed vacuoles of inclusion body myositis and oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy contain amyloid precursor protein and lysosomal markers

Rimmed vacuoles are small areas of focal destruction of muscle fibres, found in inclusion body myositis, oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy and other muscle disorders. They are known to contain amyloid proteins, probably of/3-amyloid type. We examined rimmed vacuoles immunohistochemically in 12 patients with inclusion body myositis and two patients with oeulopharyngeal muscular dystrophy with antibodies to /3-amyloid precursor protein and cathepsin B and D. We found evidence for the presence of all these markers in rimmed vacuoles. These results confirm the presence of/3-amyloid in rimmed vacuoles, and provide additional support for the hypotheses that rimmed vacuoles are of lysosomal origin and that lysosomes are probably important in the metabolism of amyloid precursor protein.

Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) is an autosomal dominant, slowly progressive myopathy of adult onset characterised by dysphagia and oculomotor disturbances 33. Muscle biopsy shows characteristic abnormalities consisting of rimmed vacuoles, moth-eaten and small angulated fibres 17. Ultrastructurally, two types of filamentous inclusions are observed: (1) nuclear inclusions composed of 8.5 nm tubular filaments28 '32; (2) 16-18 nm tubular filaments found in the rimmed vacuoles le. These filaments contained within rimmed vacuoles were also observed in inclusion body myositis (IBM), Becker muscular dystrophy and other late onset myopathies 19. IBM is a progressive distal atrophy that mainly occurs in middle-aged men, is accompanied by painful muscle cramps and is characteristically non-responsive to steroid treatment. It has recently been reported that the rimmed vacuoles of IBM are both thioflavin and Congo red positive and that they may therefore contain amyloid proteins in a /3-pleated sheet conformation 3째. Mendell et al. studied the rimmed vacuoles of IBM with antibodies to transthyretin, immunoglobulins and amyloid-A protein and excluded these as possible precursor proteins 3째. Recently, Askanas et al. demonstrated that the rimmed vacuoles of IBM showed positive immunofluorescence with a 3-amyloid peptide antibody 2,3. This incited us to further define the biochemical composition of rimmed vacuoles in IBM and OPMD by immunohistochemistry with antibodies to amyloid filaments and lysosomal markers. We found that amyloid precursor protein (APP) and cathepsin B and D were present in rimmed vacuoles. Our results confirm that rimmed vacuoles are of lysosomal origin eS. Lysosomes accumulate APP and could play an important role in the generation of /3-amyloid protein from its precursor ~째'u.

Tissue was obtained from 14 patients. Muscle biopsies of 10 IBM patients were fixed in formalin, paraffin-embedded and processed for immunohistochem-istry only. Skeletal muscle biopsies were obtained from the M. deltoideus of 2 0 P M D patients and M. tibialis anterior and M. biceps brachii of 2 additional IBM patients. These muscle biopsies were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen cooled isopentane, and cryostat sections were prepared. Cryosections (8 /xm) were fixed in acetone and then incubated with antibodies directed to: desmin, myosin, a-tubulin, ubiquitin, amyloid precursor protein 770 amino acid form (APP 770,Up 189) 27, A4 (polyclonal antiserum to /3-amyloid protein se- quence 2-43), 22Cll, a monoctonal antibody to a Nterminal epitope of APP (Boehringer Mannheim) 34, two polyclonal antibodies (cathepsin B and D) and one monoclonal antibody (cathepsin D, Novocastra) to lysosomal protease. Paraffin, cryostat and semithin sections (1 ~m) were processed for immunocytochemistry (ICC) either with the unlabelled antibody bridge technique (PAP) 31 or avidin biotin complex (ABC) 21 technique for polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies respectively. Prior to staining, the Araldite (Fluka) of semithin sections was removed according to the method of Maxwell 29. Controls consisted of preincubation with normal swine serum or omission of primary antibody.

For detection of /3-amyloid protein, some of the sections were pretreated with 80% formic acid (Sigma) for 5 min 14"23. Histochemical methods were used to detect non-specific esterase 15 and acid phosphatase s. Histochemical detection of amyloid was also performed using Congo red 13 and Crystal violet staining 2째. For electron microscopy (EM) muscle tissues were fixed in 4% glutaraldehyde and postfixed in 2% osmium tetroxide, dehydrated and embedded in Araldite. Ultrathin sections were stained with 2% uranyl acetate and lead citrate and examined with a Philips CM10 electron microscope at 60 kV. Light microscopic study of the biopsies of OPMD patients showed increased variation in fibre size, with numerous atrophic fibres. In both OPMD patients, numerous rimmed vacuoles were present (Fig. la). The wall of these vacuoles often contained fibrillar material. The muscle fibres containing these vacuoles showed various abnormalities: some showed only a slight disturbance of the myofibrillar pattern, detectable with antibodies against desmin and myosin. Others were atrophic with a large central inclusion.

345

Apparently normal muscle fibres often showed disturbances of the sarcoplasmic reticulum without true vacuoles. Subsarcolemmal nuclei were often swollen and some contained an eosinophilic inclusion. Crystal violet stained granular and fibrillar structures in the rimmed vacuoles. Some of these structures showed a reddish metachromasia, indicating the presence of amyloid. The granular structures and sometimes the walls of the rimmed vacuoles showed Congo red staining, but we could not demonstrate birefringence, indicating that the /3-amyloid is probably not in a /3-pleated sheet conformation. The results of ICC are summarized in Table I. The wall and sometimes centre of the rimmed vacuoles proper were immunolabeled with antibodies to ubiquitin ( ). This pattern of immunostain was completely absent in the controls. Results of ICC were similar on cryosections and paraffin sections. The sarcoplasm peripheral to the rimmed vacuoles was sometimes labelled by a-tubulin and myosin antibodies.

IBM muscle biopsies showed numerous rimmed vacuoles that were often grouped in adjoining muscle fibres. In addition to signs of muscle destruction, such as muscle fibre atrophy and necrosis, an inflammatory infiltrate consisting of lymphocytes and monocytes was often present. Immunoreactivity with antibodies to ubiquitin, APP,/3-amyloid peptide and cathepsin was a consistent finding in the rimmed vacuoles of IBM and OPMD. In IBM, the muscle fibres that contained rimmed vacuoles were not as atrophic as in OPMD. Histochemistry and histoenzymology showed that the rimmed vacuoles contained non-specific esterase and acid phosphatase activity, confirming their lysosomal origin. A normal checkerboard pattern with type 1, type 2a and type muscle fibers 2b was found. The atrophic fibres containing the rimmed vacuoles belonged exclusively to type 1.

With EM in OPMD intranuclear inclusions were found which consisted of: (a) intranuclear filaments ranging from 6 to 9 nm and arranged in a characteristic palissade structure were mainly observed in fibres with a normal myofibrillar pattern and occasionally in atrophic fibres, (b) 16-to 20-nm filaments, similar to those that have been described in IBM 12, were also found in the nuclei of atrophic fibres in one case. They showed a twist-like aspect. Both types of intranuclear filaments did not occur together within the same nuclei. Rimmed vacuoles disclosed autophagosomes, pseudo-myelinic figures and 18-to 20-nm filaments (see above) with a twist-like aspect. One ragged-red fibre with large subsarcolemmal accumulations of normal mitochondria and cytoplasmic bodies was also observed. In IBM intranuclear inclusions and degenerative figures were observed by EM in atrophic muscle fibres in one of two patients. The tubular filaments measured 7-15 nm in diameter. Intrasarcoplasmic filaments (10-18 nm)were found in both patients. The rimmed vacuoles (1-18 /xm) showed numerous membranous osmiophilic whorls, glycogen particles and sometimes adjacent sarcoplasmic filaments. A few intramitochondrial paracrystalline inclusions were also observed.

The biochemical composition of the tubulofilamentous inclusions in OPMD and IBM remains unknown. We have studied these inclusions with a wide range of antibodies and demonstrated immunoreactivity for /3amyloid peptide, amyloid precursor protein and ubiquitin. We further showed that rimmed vacuoles contain acid phosphatase and demonstrated immunoreactivity for the lysosomal proteases cathepsin B and D. Ubiquitin plays an important role in non-lysosomal degradation of proteins. It has been reported in rimmed vacuoles of IBM and OPMD 4. Although ubiquitin is most often found in association with abnormal cytoskeletal components, accumulation in lysosomal dense bodies has also been reported 16. By EM, the rimmed vacuoles contain filaments which are thicker than amyloid filaments. Yet, our ICC findings seem to suggest that /3-amyloid is deposited in rimmed vacuoles. The presence of amyloid was confirmed with Crystal violet but not with Congo red. Similar observations were made by Askanas 3, suggesting that the /3-amyloid detected by immunocytochemistry in rimmed vacuoles consists of amorphous deposits not organized in a/3-pleated sheet conformation. /3-Amyloid protein is most often found in the senile plaques of Alzheimer's disease and in congophilic angiopathy 8. This /3-amyloid protein is a 4 kDa, 42 amino acid polypeptide derived from a larger 90-120 kDa amyloid precursor protein (APP), a membrane-bound protein mostly produced in neurons, but also found to a lower extent in many other cell types a. APP has been demonstrated in neurones and dystrophic neurites 7"22. It has been hypothesized 24'25 that rimmed vacuoles are of lysosomal origin. To further investigate this possibility, we tested for the presence of lysosomal markers cathepsin B and D, and indeed rimmed vacuoles were found to contain these markers.

Taken together, these results support the hypothesis that the rimmed vacuoles are of lysosomal origin 24"25, as demonstrated by the presence of lysosomal proteases and acid phosphatase. Moreover, the known association of APP with lysosomes in the brain 7' 22 is here confirmed for non-neuronal tissue. This suggests that the production of /3-amyloid in lysosomal metabolism is not confined to neurons.

We thank Prof. G.C. Guazzi for his support. We thank Dr. A.M. Cataldo for providing us with the antibodies against cathepsin B and D, Dr. K. Beyreuther for providing us with the antibody against A4, Dr. B.D. Greenberg for providing us with the antibody against APP 770 (Up 189). We are indebted to I. Bats for excellent photographic work and to L. Dewit and E. Peeters for excellent technical work. This paper has been supported in part by a grant of the Foundation for Medical Scientific Research (FGWO nr. 3.0020.90) and by the National Foundation for Scientific Research. The financial support of Telethon-Italy to the project "Mitochondrial Encephalomyopathies: Molecular Characterization of New Familial Phenotypes' is gratefully acknowledged.

Fig. 1 .1Fig. 1. Cryostat (a) and semithin (b-f) sections of muscle stained with (a) hematoxylin-eosin, and with antibodies to (b) ubiquitin, (c) A4, (d) APP (Up 189), (e) APP (22C11), (f) cathepsin D. (Immunoperoxidase technique, light Toluidine blue counter-stain, Bar = 10/zm).

Fig. lb), A4 (Fig. lc), APP (Up 189, Fig. ld), APP 22Cll (Fig. le), cathepsin B (not shown) and D (Fig. lf

TABLE IISummary of immunocytochemical resultsM, male; F, female; IBM, inclusion body myositis; OPMD, oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy; RV, rimmed vacuoles; IC, interstitial cells; MC, macrophages; Ubiq, ubiquitin; APP, amyloid precursor protein; Cat B, cathepsin B; Cat D, cathepsin D.SexAgeDiagnosisUbiqAPP (22Cll)APP (Up 189)A4CatDCatBM68IBMRV+punctiform +RV+RV+ IC+RV+RV+M75IBMRV+punctiform +IC+ RV+-RV+RV+M61IBMRV +RV +RV +RV + IC +RV +RV +F75IBMRV +wall of RV +RV +RV +RV +RV +M68IBMRV +-RV +-RV +RV +F70IBMRV +diffuse +RV +RV +RV +RV +M55IBM-punctiform +RV +RV +RV +M63IBMRV +punctiform +-RV +RV +F58IBMRV +punctiform +wall of RV +-RV +RV +M74IBMRV +punctiform +MC +-RV +RV +F68IBMRV +-RV +RV +RV +RV +F62IBMRV +-RV +RV +RV +RV +F63OPMDRV +RV +RV +RV +RV +RV +F68OPMDRV +RV +RV +RV +RV +RV +

