Transfer of ,3-amyloid precursor protein gene using adenovirus vector causes mitochondrial abnormalities in cultured normal human muscle

As in Alzheimer-disease (AD) brain, vacuo- lated muscle fibers of inclusion-body myositis (IBM) contain abnormally accumulated g-amyloid precursor protein (f3APP), including its 8-amyloid protein epitope, and in- creased jAPP-751 mRNA. Other similarities between IBM muscle and AD brain phenotypes include paired helical fila- ments, hyperphosphorylated tau protein, apolipoprotein E, and mitochondrial abnormalities, including decreased cyto- chrome-c oxidase (COX) activity. The pathogenesis of these abnormalities in IBM muscle and AD brain is not known. We now report that direct transfer of the f3APP gene, using adenovirus vector, into cultured normal human muscle fibers causes structural abnormalities of mitochondria and de- creased COX activity. In this adenovirus-mediated 3APP gene transfer, we demonstrated that j8APP overproduction can induce mitochondrial abnormalities. The data suggest that excessive IAPP may be responsible for mitochondrial and COX abnormalities in IBM muscle and perhaps AD brain.

3-Amyloid precursor protein (,3APP), whose gene is on chro- mosome 21, is a cell surface glycoprotein containing a large extracellular N-terminal domain, a transmembrane /3-amyloid protein (A,B) domain, and a short cytoplasmic C-terminal domain (1). The ,BAPP gene produces several alternatively spliced transcripts encoding different ,BAPP isoforms. The two largest isoforms, ,BAPP-751 and /3APP-770, contain in their extracellular region an insert of a Kunitz-type protease- inhibitor (KPI) (1).

,BAPP is considered to play an important role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease (AD) (1-3). The f3APP epitope AP3, a 39-to 43-residue polypeptide, is the major component of amyloid fibrils in blood vessels and senile plaques of AD brain. In AD, abnormal accumulation of AP3 is thought to be due partially to increased generation of ,3APP as well as to abnormal processing of it (1, 2).

Inclusion-body myositis (IBM) is the only human disease in which pathologic accumulation of ,BAPP, including the A,B epitope, and increase of ,BAPP-751 mRNA have been identi- fied outside the brain (4-6). In IBM, /3APP epitopes accu-

mulate in vacuolated muscle fibers, which are the hallmark of this disease (reviewed in ref . 7).

IBM is the most common progressive muscle disease beginning in patients 50 years and older (7). In addition to accu- mulation of ,BAPP epitopes, there are other striking similari- ties between IBM muscle and AD brain. For example, IBM vacuolated muscle fibers contain amyloid evidenced by Congo red positivity (8) and abnormal accumulation of several pro- teins characteristic of AD brain, including apolipoprotein E (9), ai-antichymotrypsin (10), and ubiquitin (11). By electron microscopy, IBM vacuolated muscle fibers contain 15to The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by page charge payment. This article must therefore be hereby marked "advertisement" in accordance with 18 U.S.C. §1734 solely to indicate this fact. 21-nm paired helical filaments (PHFs) which, like AD brain PHFs, contain hyperphosphorylated tau (12). /3APP accumulation is considered to play a major role in the pathogenesis of IBM and AD and is thought to precede other changes in both diseases (1)(2)(3)(4)12), but its actual consequences are not understood in either disease. To determine whether overexpression of the ,BAPP gene in muscle and the resultant ,3APP protein overproduction can cause at least some aspects of the IBM phenotype, we utilized replication-deficient ade- novirus as the vector to mediate transfer of /3APP cDNA encoding /3APP-751 into primary cultures of normal adult human muscle. [Replication-deficient recombinant human adenoviruses are suitable to transfer foreign DNA into post- mitotic cells, and they induce a high level of long-lasting expression of the transferred genes (reviewed in ref. 13).]

We report that transfer of the ,3APP gene into well- differentiated cultured human muscle fibers resulted in de- creased cytochrome-c oxidase (COX) activity and striking mitochondrial abnormalities. This is, to our knowledge, the first adenovirus-mediated ,BAPP gene transfer.

MATERIAL AND METHODS

Cultured Htlman Muscle. Human muscle cultures were established, as previously described, from satellite cells of portions of diagnostic muscle biopsies (obtained with informed consent) from patients who subsequently were considered free of muscle disease after all tests were performed (14-16). In brief, dissociated myoblasts were purified by double preplating and low-density plating and then were seeded at a concentra- tion of 3 X 105 cells per 60-mm Petri dish and 1 x 105 cells per 35-mm Petri dish (16). Cultures were maintained in F14 medium (GIBCO) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (HyClone), insulin (10 Zg/ml; Sigma), and an antibiotic/ antimycotic mixture (Sigma). This medium promotes differ- entiation of aneurally cultured human muscle and enables its maintenance for several weeks (14). Fifteen independent experiments were performed, each from a different person's muscle biopsy.

Construction of an Adenovirus Vector Carrying f3APP cDNA. Two adenoviruses, containing the ,3APP gene in sense and antisense orientation, were constructed. Most of the procedures were performed as described by Graham and  Prevec (17).

In brief, pACCMVpLpA was prepared by modifying the pAC vector (18, 19), accomplished by replacing a region of the adenovirus genome between map units 1.3 and 9.1 with the cytomegalovirus (CMV) early promoter. A cloning cassette was also inserted immediately downstream from the CMV promoter, followed by a fragment of the simian virus 40 genome that Abbreviations: AD, Alzheimer disease; ,BAPP, /3-amyloid precursor protein; CMV, cytomegalovirus; COX, cytochrome-c oxidase; IBM, inclusion-body myositis; pfu, plaque-forming unit(s). *To whom reprint requests should be addressed.

FIG. 1. Phase-contrast micrographs of 4-week-old cultured muscle 2 weeks after I3APP gene transfer (A), control noninfected sister-cultured muscle (B), and sister-cultured muscle infected with recombinant wild adenovirus (C). There are various degrees of vacuolization in the P3APP-overexpressing cultured muscle fibers (A), whereas same-age control muscle fibers are healthy and cross-striated (B and C). Lower-power photomicrograph of 4-week cultured muscle infected for 2 weeks with adenovirus vector carrying f3APP gene in antisense orientation illustrates healthy muscle fibers (D). (A-C, X2400; D, x600.) included the small-t-antigen intron and the polyadenylylation signal. A 3-kb human f3APP cDNA encoding ,3APP-751 con- taining the KPI insert (20) was inserted into pACCMVpLpA.

Two recombinant viruses were then obtained by cotrans- fection of 293 cells (AdElA-transformed human embryonic kidney cells) with appropriate pACCMVpLpA plasmids and pJM17 plasmid (21). The pJM17 plasmid encodes a full-length adenovirus 5 genome interrupted by the insertion of the bacterial plasmid pBRX at position 3.7 map units, allowing one to exceed the packaging limit for adenovirus (21). Homolo- gous recombination in 293 cells between the pJM17 plasmid and the recomnbinant pACCMVpLpA-f3APP and pACCMV- af3APP (,3APP cDNA in antisense orientation) generated two replication-deficient viruses, which were carrying ,3APP cDNA in sense and antisense orientation. The presence of these DNAs was confirmed by Southern blotting. Viruses were amplified by growth in 293 cells. The appropriate viral plaques were expanded and purified and were stored at -20°C.

Transfer of the BAPP Gene in Adenovirus Vector into Cultured Human Muscle Fibers. Human muscle fibers cul- tured for 2 weeks (which was 5-7 days after the myoblasts completed their fusion) were infected with doses of I3APP adenovirus ranging from 0.3 x 108 to 1.5 x 108 plaque-forming units (pfu) adenovirus per ml of culture medium. Virus was allowed to remain in the medium for 2 hr and then was removed by several washes. Controls were sister cultures infected with: (a) adenovirus carrying ,3APP cDNA in anti- sense orientation, (b) adenovirus carrying a f3-galactosidase gene (22), and (c) replication-deficient recombinant "wild" adenovirus vector, composed of the same two plasmids as f3APP adenovirus but not carrying any other foreign cDNA except the CMV promoter gene and the simian virus 40 polyadenylylation signal (22). Experimental and control cul- tured human muscle fibers were studied concurrently. Over- expression of the ,BAPP gene was studied by Northern blots, immunoblots, in situ hybridization, and immunocytochemistry, as previously described (5, 6, 23). Immunofluorescence studies utilized the following rabbit antibodies: (a) R37, against C-terminal sequence 681-695 of ,BAPP (C-,3APP) (24), di- luted 1:200; (b) T97, against N-terminal sequence 18-38 of   ,3APP (N-,BAPP) (24), diluted 1:200; and (c) R1282, against AP3 sequence 1-40 (25), diluted 1:500. For immunoblots, R37 antiserum was used at a dilution of 1:3000.

Processing of Cultured Muscle for Electron Microscopy (EM) Studies. Cultures grown in 35-mm Petri dishes were fixed in 1.25% glutaraldehyde/2% paraformaldehyde, postfixed in 1% OS04, dehydrated, and embedded in Epon, as described (26).

After embedding, the areas of interest were identified by phase-contrast microscopy, marked, and core-drilled out (26). These cores were glued into Epon blanks and thin-sectioned (26).

COX Staining for Light and Electron Microscopy. This was performed as described (27). For light microscopy, cultures were air-dried and stained for 4 hr. For ultrastructural visu- alization of COX, the cultures were fixed as above and then stained for 7-12 hr in the COX solution. Subsequently, cultures were postfixed in 1% Os04 and processed for EM as above.

RESULTS

Effects of 8APP Gene Transfer into Cultured Human

Muscle. There was a dose-dependent cytopathic effect of the ,BAPP gene transfer. B3APP adenovirus at 1.5 x 108 pfu/ml caused pronounced vacuolization of muscle fibers and their degeneration within 3-5 days after infection. A dose of 1 x 101 pfu/ml resulted in pronounced vacuolization 10-16 days after infection (Fig. 1). Smaller doses, 0.5 or 0.3 x 108 pfu/ml, also produced degeneration of most of the muscle fibers, but only several weeks after ,BAPP gene transfer; these doses were used in the present study. Control sister cultures infected for several weeks with recombinant virus not carrying the ,3APP gene, (A) Autoradiograph of Northern blot of RNA extracted from control cultured human muscle (lanes a and b) and sister cultures infected for 5 days (lane c) and 10 days (lane d) with adenovirus carrying the ,BAPP gene. Ten micrograms of RNA was loaded in each lane. Lanes b-d were exposed for 10 min. Lane a is the same as lane b but exposed for 5 hr. There is strikingly increased P3APP-mRNA signal in the infected muscle cultures. (B) Immunoblots of proteins isolated from ,3APP-overexpressing (lane a) and control sister (lane b) cultured muscle probed with antibody against the C-terminal epitope of 3APP. There is a strong band corresponding to 116-kDa ,APP in the fAPP-overexpressing cultures, and only a very faint band (indi- cated by arrow) in control cultures. Cultures were infected 10 days previously with the adenovirus carrying the 13APP gene. The left lane displays molecular weight standards. A"' AN FIG. 3. In situ hybridization with ,3APP-751 antisense cRNA of 3-week-old cultured human muscle 7 days after infection with adeno- virus vector carrying the ,3APP gene (A) and of uninfected control sister muscle culture (B). Autoradiographic exposure time was 3 hr (A) or 8 hr (B). There is strikingly increased ,3APP-751 mRNA signal in the infected culture. (x510.) recombinant virus carrying the j3APP gene in antisense ori- entation, or adenovirus carrying the f-galactosidase gene did not manifest a cytopathic effect like those achieved with the sense ,3APP gene.

Strong ,BAPP gene overexpression was documented by Northern blots, immunoblots, in situ hybridization, and immu- nocytochemistry (Figs. 2-4). In situ hybridization and immu- nocytochemical studies demonstrated f3APP overexpression in about 90% of the muscle fibers.

Mitochondrial Abnormalities in Cultured Muscle Fibers Overexpressing f3APP. COX histochemical staining. One day after ,BAPP gene transfer, there was a slight decrease of COX reactivity in about 25% of the muscle fibers. Five to 7 days after ,BAPP gene transfer, there was a considerable decrease in the intensity of COX staining of the ,3APP-overexpressing cultured muscle fibers compared with the controls; >50% of the former were totally devoid of staining whereas none of the control fibers were. After 2 weeks of f3APP overexpression, the intensity of COX staining had further decreased, being virtually undetectable D FIG. 4. Immunofluorescence with antibodies against A,B (A) and C-terminal (B) and N-terminal (C) epitopes of f3APP in 3APP- overexpressing cultured muscle fibers and against C-terminal epitope of ,3APP in a sister uninfected-control muscle fiber (D). The P3APPoverexpressing cultures show strikingly increased immunoreactivity of all ,3APP epitopes (A-C), whereas the uninfected control (D) is negative. (In other control cultures, staining with antibodies against AP3 and N-terminal ,BAPP was also negative.) (x900.) in 80% of the muscle fibers (Fig. SA). COX histochemical reactivity was decreased in both normal-looking nonvacuolated cultured muscle fibers and the vacuolated fibers. At the same 2-week time point, control cultures infected with the recombinant wild adenovirus vector and noninfected cultures had strong COX reactivity (Fig. 5 B and C).

Ultrastructural histochemistry of COX, performed 1 week after 3APP gene transfer, revealed that the majority of muscle fiber mitochondria were COX-negative, even though their ultrastructure appeared normal (Fig. SD). Two to 3 weeks later, most of the mitochondria were abnormal; they were either COX-negative or had COX positivity on only a few remaining cristae (Figs. 5 G-I). The mitochondrial amorphous ?, aV '!t -* .. 1:

.,,. reaction is negative in the ,3APP-overexpressing cultured muscle fibers 15 days after ,3APP gene transfer, whereas sister-cultured muscle fibers infected with the recombinant wild adenovirus vector (B) and uninfected control sister-cultured muscle fibers (C) have very strong COX staining. Ultrastructural cytochemistry of COX reactivity in cultured human muscle 4 days after ,BAPP gene transfer (D), in a sister-cultured muscle infected with the recombinant wild adenovirus vector (E), and in a sister noninfected-control cultured muscle (F) shows that there is strong COX reactivity in the mitochondria of muscle fibers in both controls. ,3APP-overexpressing muscle mito- chondria do not manifest structural abnormalities but they are devoid of COX reactivity (except for one mitochondrion). G-I illustrate examples in abnormal mitochondria of COX activity that is located only in patches on a few remaining cristae (G and H) or on the inner mitochondrial membrane (I). (A-C, X560; D, x8400; E and F, x7700;

G and H, x 18,900; I, x 14,700.) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93 (1996)  A-C). Four weeks after ,BAPP gene transfer, many mitochondria have lost their cristae and matrix (D). Control uninfected sister culture (E) and sister culture infected with recombinant wild adenovirus (F) have normal mitochondria. (A, X26,000; B, X27,000; C, x43,000; D-F, X27,000.) material and paracrystalline inclusions were devoid of COX reactivity. At the same 2-to 3-week time points, the mito- chondria in control cultures infected with the recombinant wild adenovirus vector and in noninfected cultures had strong COX reactivity on the cristae and inner membrane (Fig. 5 E  and F).

Transmission EM. Ultrastructural mitochondrial abnormal- ities in ,3APP-overexpressing cultured muscle included their significant enlargement, disorganization, and paucity of cristae, paracrystalline inclusions, vacuolization, and accumula- tion of amorphous material (Figs. 5 G-I and 6 A-C). Mito- chondrial abnormalities increased with the duration of ,3APP overexpression. For example, even though 1 week of 13APP overexpression caused reduction or elimination of COX ac- tivity in the majority of mitochondria (see above), the paracrystalline inclusions were not evident until 3 weeks of overexpression. Clusters of very enlarged and ballooned mitochondria were typically present 4 weeks after 13APP gene transfer (Fig. 6D), sometimes in muscle fibers without myofibril disorganization or other features of muscle fiber degen- eration. At the same time points, the mitochondria in control cultures infected with the recombinant wild adenovirus vector and in noninjected cultures had normal mitochondria (Fig. 6 E and F). Mitochondrial abnormalities in cultured muscle overexpressing the f3APP gene resembled those present in IBM biopsied muscle (Fig. 7).

In the grossly abnormal cultured muscle fibers overexpress- ing the 83APP gene, similar mitochondrial abnormalities were present and, in addition, there were various cytoplasmic mem- branous inclusions, and clusters of 6-to 10-nm filaments in the Medical Sciences: Askanas et al.

IP FIG. 7. EM of various examples of abnormal mitochondria in IBM-biopsied muscle, which resemble those in J3APP gene-overexpressing cultured human muscle illustrated in Fig. 6A-D. Most of the mitochondria have lost their cristae pattern (A-D), and some also have lost their matrix (A). Several stages of development of the paracrystalline inclusions are illustrated (B-D). (A, x43,000; B-D, x53,000.) cytoplasm and 15-to 21-nm tubulofilaments in the nuclei, all of which are very similar to those present in IBM biopsied muscle (28).

DISCUSSION

Our studies provide the evidence that overexpression of the f3APP gene and overproduction of 13APP in human muscle fibers can cause decreased COX enzymatic activity and struc- tural abnormalities of mitochondria. The degree of abnormal- ity correlated with the duration of fAPP overexpression.

Decreased COX activity preceded mitochondrial structural abnormalities. These changes were not simply caused by the adenovirus itself, since there were no mitochondrial abnor- malities in our controls consisting of cultured human muscle infected with recombinant wild adenovirus, adenovirus carry- ing ,BAPP cDNA in antisense orientation, or adenovirus carrying the f-galactosidase reporter gene. Mitochondrial COX deficiency and structural abnormalities were not sec- ondary to the other recognized aspects of f3APP-induced muscle degeneration, since the mitochondrial changes were present earlier, in muscle fibers lacking other signs of degeneration, as well as later in vacuolated muscle fibers. Moreover, our preliminary light-microscopy histochemical studies per- formed in three experiments indicated no differences in succinate dyhydrogenase, a nuclear gene-encoded mitrochondrial enzyme, between cultures overexpressing the 83APP gene and control muscle cultures (data not shown).

Ragged-red fibers (RRFs), as originally described (29) and defined by their characteristic appearance on Engel-Gomori trichrome staining (30), are an important indicator of mito- chondrial abnormality in human muscle. RRFs and COXnegative muscle fibers are known in IBM muscle biopsies (31,32). Mitochondrial ultrastructural abnormalities and multiple deletions of mitochondria DNA were reported in IBM (31). Even though RRFs and multiple DNA deletions occur also in aged, otherwise-normal muscle, the percent of RRFs in IBM muscle is higher than that seen in age-matched control muscle (31,32).

Abnormalities of the COX system have been described in AD. For example, COX enzymatic activity and the mRNA for a mitochondrial gene-encoded COX II subunit are decreased in AD brain (33)(34)(35). Platelets from AD patients also have reduced COX activity (36). In addition to decreased COX activity in AD brain, there is generalized depression of elec- tron-transport-chain activity compared with age-matched controls (37).

COX is a holoenzyme composed of 13 subunits (38). The three largest subunits, COX I-III, are encoded in the mito- chondrial genome, whereas COX IV-XIII subunits are en- coded in the nuclear genome, making COX activity dependent on both mitochondrial and nuclear genes (39). The great majority of mitochondrial proteins are encoded by nuclear DNA and are imported from the cytoplasm through complex translocation machinery under the control of the nuclear genome (39). Mitochondrial abnormalities can result from a DNA malfunction within the mitochondria themselves or within the nucleus, or from disturbed import of proteins into mitochondria or alterations of cytoplasmic proteins that in- fluence mitochondria.

The cause of mitochondrial abnormalities in IBM muscle and AD brain is not known.

Our study demonstrated a relationship between ,BAPP overexpression and abnormality of COX and mitochondrial structure. Whether the f3APP effect on mitochondria was direct or indirect is not known. Perhaps increased P3APP can affect DNA stability, repair, or transcription.

A relationship between oxidative stress, mitochondrial ab- normality, and neural degeneration has been proposed (re- viewed in ref. 40). This mechanism has not yet been explored in muscle tissue. Our preliminary immunohistochemical and in situ hybridization studies show that superoxide dismutase 1 immunoreactivity and mRNA are increased in ,BAPP- overexpressing cultured muscle fibers. Whether this increase reflects a homeostatic mechanism in response to an increase of free radicals, a direct effect of the overexpressed (3APP, or another phenomenon is not known.

Our model of human muscle tissue culture offers several advantages for studies of ,BAPP gene overexpression, for example: it enables culturing to a rather mature state the human cells primarily affected by the disease, namely, the muscle fibers (reviewed in ref. 14); and since human muscle Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93 (1996)   1319 fibers can be cultured for several weeks, it is possible to study chronologically the changes consequent to PAPP overexpres- sion. Because adult human neurons cannot be cultured for studying AD, long-term transfer of the 3APP gene into cultured human muscle may provide important information regarding the role of PAPP relevant to the pathogenesis of AD as well as IBM.

By demonstrating that jAPP gene transfer causes decreased COX activity and structural abnormality of mitochondria, our study suggests that 3APP may play a key role in the induction of those abnormalities, both in AD and in IBM, and provides an excellent experimental model for further molecular studies of mitochondrial abnormalities due to ,3APP overexpression.

We are grateful to Drs. A. Gomez-Foix and R. D. Gerard for the 3-galactosidase gene and the wild recombinant adenoviruses and the pACCMVpLpA plasmid and to Drs. D. J. Selkoe, T. Ishii, and S. Haga for their antibodies against ,BAPP epitopes. S.B. is in the Department of Biochemistry and Physiology of the University of Barcelona, Barcelona. This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health, Muscular Dystrophy Association, and Alzhei- mer's Association to V.A.

FIG. 2. (A)Autoradiograph of Northern blot of RNA extracted from control cultured human muscle (lanes a and b) and sister cultures infected for 5 days (lane c) and 10 days (lane d) with adenovirus carrying the ,BAPP gene. Ten micrograms of RNA was loaded in each

Medical Sciences: Askanas et al. 1316 Medical Sciences: Askanas et al.

FIG. 5 .5FIG. 5. COX staining of cultured human muscle. (A) The COX

FIG. 6 .6FIG.6. EM of abnormal mitochondria in ,BAPP-overexpressing cultured muscle fibers. Three weeks after ,BAPP gene transfer, mitochondria have lost their normal cristae pattern and contain paracrystalline inclusions (A-C). Four weeks after ,BAPP gene transfer, many mitochondria have lost their cristae and matrix (D). Control uninfected sister culture (E) and sister culture infected with recombinant wild adenovirus (F) have normal

