Inclusion body myositis associated with a severe unilateral levodopa-responsive upper extremity tremor

inclusion body myositis (IBM) is a progressive lateonset myopathy of unclear etiology. Although sporadic IBM is usually categorized with other primary inflammatory muscle diseases, the recent findings of 0-amyloid and ubiquitin within the myofibers of many IBM patients along with the long-standing recognition of IBM's relative refractoriness to immunosuppressive therapies has raised the question of a noninflammatory and, possibly, a degenerative etiology for this disorder.', 3, We report on a case of IBM associated with a severe unilateral levodoparesponsive upper extremity tremor; this case raises the possibility of a common etiology for the myopathy and movement disorder.

CASE REPORT

A 50-year-old man was first evaluated in the neuromuscular clinic at this medical center 4 years prior for progressive weakness. The patient had enjoyed normal health and participation in various athletic activities prior to the onset of symptoms at age 41 years. The first sign, prominent scapular winging, was noticed by his wife. Soon after, he developed increasing proximal limb weakness heralded by difficulty climbing stairs and raising his arms above his head. By age 47 years, he was no longer able to walk, and began to develop prominent distal limb weakness and a progressive tremor of his right hand. The tremor was most noticeable at rest and abated during sleep. The tremor became so severe, that it disrupted From the Departments of Neurology (Drs. Felice and Grunnet) and Pathology (Dr. Grunnet),

the patient's daily activities, and began to cause arm and shoulder pain. He denied swallowing or breathing problems, muscle cramps, myalgias, or sensory loss. The past medical history was otherwise unremarkable. There was no known familial consanguinity. The patient's mother had an axonal polyneuropathy of unclear etiology; otherwise, there was no known family history of neuromuscular disease.

The examination revealed a coarse resting right hand tremor with rhythmic (4-6 Hz) anteriorposterior movements of the entire hand and forearm. A pill-rolling motion was not present. The tremor abated with movemen& of the hand; there was no dysmetria or dysdiadochokinesia. Other features of parkinsonism including bradykinesia and rigidity were absent. There was moderate atrophy of the shoulder, forearm flexor, and quadriceps muscles. He was unable to stand or forcefully clench his fists. There was marked scapular winging. Strength testing revealed moderately severe weakness [Medical Research Council (MRC) grade 1-21 of the left forearm and finger flexors, knee extensors, and foot dorsiflexors; moderate weakness (MRC grade 3) of the right forearm and all proximal muscles; and mild weakness (grade 4) of all other limb muscles. The reflexes were diffusely hypoactive. The cranial nerve and sensory examinations were normal. The forced vital capacity was 4.9 L (100% of predicted). A cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study revealed a small lipoma of the quadrigeminal plate with no abnormalities of the brainstem, basal ganglia, or cerebral white matter. Nerve conduction and repetitive motor nerve stimulation studies were normal. Needle electromyography (EMG) revealed diffuse fibrillations and positive waves, and myopathic-appearing motor unit action potentials. The serum creatine kinase was 558 U/L ( n < 269). The results of thyroid studies, blood counts, chemistries, serum lactate, and acetylcholine receptor antibody titers were normal. Southern blot analyses of blood samples were negative for a dystrophin gene mutation and myotonic dystrophy expanded CTG repeat. The hematoxylin and eosin frozen sections (Fig. 1A) from the left deltoid muscle biopsy revealed scattered fiber necrosis, endomysial inflammatory cells, rimmed vacuoles, eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusions, and marked fiber size variability due primarily to atrophic fibers.

Ubiquitin immunoperoxidase stains revealed scattered accumulations of immunoreactive cytoplasmic inclusions. Congo red staining did not reveal amyloid deposition. Electron microscopy revealed intracytoplasmic filamentous inclusions and scattered myelin debris (Fig. 1B). Mitochondria appeared normal.

A 2-month trial of prednisone, 50 mg per day, was not associated with clinical improvement and, in fact, caused subjective limb weakness. Trials of trihexyphenidyl (up to 12 mg per day) and proprano-lo1 were unsuccessful in treating the tremor. The use of carbidopa-levodopa (Sinemet@), 5 tablets per day of the 25/250 mg preparation, was associated with When the patient discontinued or reduced the dosage of Sinemet@ the tremor would worsen and, then, begin to improve within 2-3 h after resuming the medication.

DISCUSSION

The muscle biopsy findings suggested the diagnosis of IBM in this case despite several atypical clinical features including the younger age of onset, scapular winging as the presenting clinical feature, and the severe unilateral resting hand tremor. A hereditary form of IBM could not be absolutely excluded or confirmed; however, the severe involvement of the quadriceps in this case was in contradistinction to the previous reports of autosomal recessive hereditary IBM.' We did not find Congophilic deposition in the muscle biopsy from this patient, suggesting that either amyloid was not present or the sections that we examined were not involved.

Although the etiology of the myopathy and tremor is uncertain, several features suggest a common association. First, both disorders may share a degenerative etiology. The progressive course of the tremor, its responsiveness to levodopa, and the absence of an appropriate MRI lesion suggest a degenerative process involving the substantia nigra, basal ganglia, or both. Recent reports of /3-amyloid4 and ubiquitid deposition, and mitochondria1 abnor-malities6B8 in the muscle biopsies from IBM patients have challenged the notion that IBM is a primary inflammatory myopathy and have raised the question of a degenerative etiology. The slow steady progression of the disease, familial pattern in some cases, and relative resistance of IBM to immunotherapy add support to this theory. Second, the coincidental occurrence of a relatively common disorder like Parkinson's disease cannot be presumed in this case. The lone occurrence of a severe unilateral resting tremor, responsive to levodopa, unassociated with other features of Parkinson's disease, and progressive for 3 years, is unusual. Third, the tremor began during a period of moderate muscle weakness and, since that time, both disorders have had a similar rate of progression. The fact that both disorders did not begin simultaneously does not exclude the possibility of a common etiology, as other "multiple systems" degenerative disorders can show a variable rate of onset of clinical symptoms.'

To our knowledge, this is the first report of IBM occurring in association with a movement disorder. This report may extend the clinical heterogeneity bris (arrow). Original magnification: X13,965.

of myopathies associated with rimmed vacuoles and intracytoplasmic filamentous inclusions, and may lend further support to the theory that IBM is a de-3. Barohn RJ, Amato M, Sahenk Z, Kissel JT, Mendell J R Inchsion body myositis: explanation for poor response to immunosuppressive therapy. 

FIGURE 1. (A) Frozen sections showing rimmed vacuoles (arrow) and eosinophilic inclusions (arrowhead) on hematoxylin and eosin stained sections. Original magnification: x250. (B) Electron microscopy showing filamentous inclusions (square) and myelin de-

Neurology 1995;45:1302-1304.Welle S, Kamp C, Thornton C. Ragged red fibers in allows its light-microscopic distinction from polymyositis. Neunormal aging and inflammatory myopathy.generative muscle disease.4. Mendell JR, Sahenk 2, Gales T, Paul L: Amyloid filaments ininclusion body myositis: novel findings provide insight into thenature of the filaments. Arch Neurol1991;48:1229-1234.5. Mikol J, Engel AG: Inclusion body myositis, in Engel AG,REFERENCESFranzini-Armstrong C (eds): Myolom, 2nd ed. New York,1.Askansas V, Engel WK, Mirabella M: Idiopathic inflammatory6. Oldfors A, Larsson N, Lindberg C, Holme E: Mitochondrid DNAmyopathies: inclusion-body myositis, polymyositis, and derma-deletions in inclusion body myositis. Bruin 1993;116 325-336.tomyositis. Cum Opin Neurol 1994;7:448-456.7. Quin NP, Marsden CD: The motor disorder of multiple systems2.Askanas V, Serdaroglu P, Engel WK, Alvarez RB: Immunocyto-atrophy. J Neurol Neurosurg PsychiutT 1993;56:1239-1242.chemical localization of ubiquitin in inclusion body myositis8. Rifai Z,IMcGraw-Hill, 1994, pp 1384-1398.

Ann Neurol rology 1992;42:460-461. 1995;37:24-29.Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-4598(199606)19:6<787::AID-MUS18>3.0.CO;2-I by University Of Illinois At Urbana Champaign, Wiley Online Library on [10/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License10974598, 1996, 6,Short ReportsMUSCLE & NERVE June 1996 789

