Update on the Use of Intravenous Immune Globulin in the Treatment of Patients with Inflammatory Muscle Disease

The inflammatory myopathies consist of three distinct groups: dermatomyositis, polymyositis, and inclusion body myositis. Dermatomyositis is distinguished by its characteristic rash, while polymyositis is a diagnosis of exclusion. Inclusion body myositis is characterized by early involvement of distal muscle groups and the quadriceps. Definitive diagnosis is made by muscle biopsy, which demonstrates histological features characteristic for each disorder. Immune mechanisms play a role in the pathogenesis of the inflammatory myopathies. A complement-mediated microangiopathy is seen in dermatomyositis, while there' is evidence for a T cell-mediated process in polymyositis and inclusion body myositis. Treatment with prednisone is helpful to a majority of patients for a period of time. Immunosuppressive drugs have met with limited success. We describe a group of patients with dermatomyositis, resistant to available therapies, whose muscle strength, skin changes, and muscle biopsies improved significantly during treatment with intravenous immune globulin. The treatment of polymyositis and inclusion body myositis with intravenous immune globulin is currently under study.

INTRODUCTION

The group of inflammatory myopathies had been a heterogeneous group until a few years ago, when rather distinct clinical, histological, and immunopathologic criteria emerged that allowed their separation into the following three major subsets: polymyositis (PM), dermatomyositis (DM), and inclusion body myositis (IBM) (1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7)(8)(9)(10)(11).

Dermatomyositis is a distinct disease, because of the characteristic skin rash which often precedes the manifestation of muscle weakness. The muscle weakness is of subacute onset, has a steadily progressive course, and 1Neuromuscular Diseases Section, Department of Health & Human Services, National Institute of Neurological Disorders & Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892. affects predominantly the proximal muscle groups. The creatine kinase is often elevated, but at times it can be normal, especially in children. The skin rash affects the face and takes a heliotropic appearance around the nose and the eyelids. In addition, erythematous changes at the knees and knuckles are frequently observed. Microinfarcts, a sign of the microvasculopathy associated with DM, can often be seen at the base of the fingernails (1)(2)(3).

Although diagnosis of DM is easier and early because of the characteristic skin rash, this is not the case with PM, especially when it is not associated with other collagen vascular diseases. The diagnosis of PM when it presents alone is one of exclusion.

We define PM as a myopathy which, like DM, has a subacute onset. By definition, it presents in a patient who does not have a rash, a family history of a neuromuscular disorder, weakness of the face or of the eyes, a systemic disease, or an enzymatic muscle defect (1,2).

IBM is a common and very disabling disease that presents like PM but has slower onset and slow progression. A characteristic sign of IBM is the early involvement of the distal muscle groups, especially the finger flexors and foot extensors. Early involvement of the quadriceps muscles leads to the common clinical presentation of falling in patients with IBM. Falling is very common because the knees buckle, due to weakness of the quadriceps muscles.

The diagnosis of the acquired myopathies is clinically suspected on the basis of the distribution of muscle weakness, the presence of skin changes, and the lack of other systemic conditions or positive family history. Useful diagnostic tests include (i) electromyography, which is helpful in that it demonstrates an active myopathy, but no diagnostic electrophysiologic pattern is characteristic for these diseases; (ii) serum muscle enzymes, which are usually, but not always, elevated; and (iii) muscle biopsy, which demonstrates diagnostic his-tological features characteristic for each disorder. In DM there is significant inflammation prominent around the endomysial or perimysial blood vessels and at the periphery of the fascicles. This leads to microinfarcts, inflammation, and destruction of the muscle fibers. In PM and IBM inflammatory cells surround what appear to be healthy muscle fibers. These cells are cytotoxic T cells which invade and eventually destroy the muscle fibers. IBM is characterized by the presence of red-rimmed vacuoles, some of which have amyloid deposits, large fibers with prominent nuclei, and small fibers in groups. Accumulation of microfilaments is seen at the electron microscopy level.

PATHOGENESIS

For years, the inflammatory myopathies have been considered immune-mediated because of their association with other collagen vascular diseases or systemic autoimmune conditions. In the last several years, however, direct evidence that immune mechanisms play a role in the pathogenesis of the inflammatory myopathies has emerged. In DM there is a humoral-mediated process which is directed against intramuscular capillaries and is mediated by complement, i.e., complement-mediated microangiopathy. In contrast, evidence for a T cellmediated process which is major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I restricted (9)(10)(11)(12)(13)(14)(15)(16) is seen in PM and IBM.

In DM, double immunocytochemistry using the lectin Ulex europaeus, which binds to the endothelial cells of the capillaries, and monoclonal antibodies which function against membranolytic attack complex (MAC) has demonstrated that MAC is deposited on the endomysial capillaries. The earliest immunopathological sign of the disease is the deposition of MAC on the capillaries; this precedes the destruction of the muscle fiber.

Through osmotic lysis, the MAC causes destruction of the endothelial cell walls of the capillaries or even the larger vessels, resulting in a significant reduction of the number of capillaries, muscle ischemia, and destruction of the muscle fibers. There is concomitant dilatation of the remaining capillaries, which represents a compensatory effort to supply the ischemic areas of the muscle. The reduction in blood supply is more prominent at the periphery of the fasicle; as the disease progresses, perifascicular atrophy is seen there.

We do not know which antibody fixes complement in the endothelial cells of the muscle capillaries, but we strongly suspect an antiendothelial cell antibody. Using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and umbilical cord endothelial cells, we found that up to 50% of DM patients have antiendothelial cell antibodies. We have preliminary evidence that this antibody recognizes a 150-kD surface protein of the endothelial cell. Other factors play an additional role in facifitating the exit of complement, immune complexes, and activated T cells from the blood vessels in patients with DM. We have found that the intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM-1) is upregulated in the muscle of these patients. The endomysial blood vessels, which fundamentally express very little ICAM, demonstrate increased expression of the ICAM molecule. The ICAM-1 is a ligand for the leukocyte function association molecule (LFA-1), present on activated T cells, and it facilitates their exit from the blood vessels to the muscle. A diagrammatic representation of the events that lead to dermatomyositis from the activation of complement, formation of MAC, deposition on the capillaries, muscle ischemia, microinfarct, and reduced number and dilation of the remaining capillaries is shown in Fig. 1.

In contrast to DM, PM is a T-cell-mediated disease. It is initiated by cytotoxic CD8 + T cells which surround healthy but MHC class I antigen-expressing muscle fibers. Although MHC class I is not expressed by normal muscle fibers, in PM there is expression of MHC-I throughout the muscle including the nonnecrotic muscle fibers, in areas remote from the inflammation. CD8 + T lymphocytes can be cytotoxic to autologous myotubes in tissue culture (17). We do not know, however, which antigen these T cells recognize.

Another cell that also plays a direct role in PM is the macrophage. The macrophages in these patients are sensitized and they express a variety of activation markers, including complement receptors and Fc receptors for IgG.

A reasonable sequence in the pathogenesis of PM is as follows. The disease trigger, i.e., a virus or an autoimmune process, upregulates ICAM on the endothelial cells. T cells (and macrophages) exit from the blood vessels by binding via their ligand LFA-1 and traffic to the muscle fiber, where they recognize unknown antigens in the context of MHC class I expression. Macrophages may play a direct role through a variety of lymphokines and cytokines. A diagrammatic representation of PM is shown in Fig. 2.

TREATMENT

The immunopathogenesis of PM and DM has traditionally led to treatment with immunosuppressive drugs (1,2,18,19). Prednisone has been used for years in the absence of controlled trials. If prednis0ne fails to control the symptoms, or if a steroid-sparing effect is needed, we Fig. 1. Sequence of immunopathological events in dermatomyositis from the activation of complement C3 by antibodies (Y) to the formation of membranolytic attack complex (MAC) and its deposition onto the muscle capillaries (A). Progression of the immunopathologic process causes destruction of the capillaries, muscle ischemia, and dilation of the remaining muscle capillaries (B, C). The released cytokines lead to activation of intercellular adhesion molecules (ICAM-1) and facilitate movement of T cells to muscle. add azathioprine, which has a limited effect. In spite of anecdotal reports of efficacy in a few patients, other immunosuppressive drugs, such as methotrexate, cyclophosphamide, chlorambucil, and cyclosporine, and immunomodulatory procedures, such as plasmapheresis, have limited success, but considerable toxicity. For this reason we attempted to establish the efficacy of highdose IVIG in the treatment of inflammatory myopathy.

USE OF HIGH-DOSE IVIG IN D M

Since the first reported case of PM treated with IVIG, there have been a number of trials (all uncontrolled) showing that patients with PM or DM can respond to IVIG. If we lump together all the published studies, 11 of 15 patients with PM have responded and 11 of 12 with DM have responded to IVIG (20,21). These observa-Fig. 2. Sequence of immunopathological events in polymyositis. Activated CD8 + cells and macrophages traffic to the muscle and invade the sarcolemma. The antigen(s) recognized by the CD8 + cells (and rarely 2//6 T cells) is(are) unknown but the recognition is MHC-1 restricted. Cytokines play additional roles in the movement of T cells to the muscle. Activated macrophages express activation markers. tions prompted us to perform double-blind studies. As mentioned earlier, PM, DM, and IBM are different diseases, so controlled studies should be done separately for each. Our studies with IVIG treatment in PM and IBM are ongoing. Our study in DM has been completed and recently published (22).

For this study we selected and randomized patients who had active disease, unresponsive or partially responsive to immunotherapies. The patients' medications remained unchanged during the study and for 3 months before and after enrollment. All assessors were blinded except for the nurse coordinator. The patients received three infusions of IVIG (2 g/kg/month) or placebo. At the end of the 3 months the patients had an option to cross over to the other arm of the study. Access to all of the laboratory parameters was sealed from the computer and the chart. The code was broken when all patients completed the study.

The main objective of IVIG therapy was improvement in muscle strength and skin rash. We used a variety of measurements to assess muscle strength, such as neuromuscular symptom scores with a total normal score of 60, an expanded Medical Research Council (MRC) scale with a total normal score of 90, and scales reflecting activities of daily living.

Using similar scales we have found previously that some patients on placebo can demonstrate mild improvement, up to two total MRC grades. For that reason, we defined improvement as "major" when more than five grades in the total scores were demonstrated and "mild" when scores two to four grades above the baseline were noted.

Eight patients were initially randomized to IVIG, and seven to placebo. The duration of the disease was the same in both groups. The pretreatment muscle strength was also the same in both groups. After treatment, however, there was a very significant improvement in muscle strength, as reflected in the neuromuscular symptoms and MRC scores, in the IVIG-treated group (22). In contrast, the scores in the placebo-treated patients remained unchanged. When the crossover data were put together, 9 of the 12 patients who received IVIG showed major improvement, compared to no patients in the placebo group. Mild improvement was attained by three patients in the placebo group and two in the IVIG group. Five patients in the placebo group worsened during the infusions. The improvement was often dramatic; several patients who used a wheelchair or crutches before IVIG treatment were able to resume almost-normal activity levels for the first time in years, after only two infusions.

Both muscle strength and skin changes improved. Erythematous eruptions and chronic scaling discolorations at the knuckles receded.

Muscle biopsies were repeated after the patients completed the study to investigate the mechanism of the improvement. They were read blindly before the code was broken. In each specimen in five randomly selected perifascicular regions, we counted, before and after therapy, the number and diameter of the muscle fibers, the number and diameter of the capillaries, and the ratio of the number of muscle fibers to that of capillaries. Furthermore, we looked for the deposition of MAC, degree of endomysial inflammation, and expression of MHC-I and ICAM-1 molecules. IVIG also had an impressive effect on immunopathology, as demonstrated by the resolution of MAC deposits and downregulation of MHC-I and ICAM-1 expression on the repeat biopsies.

MECHANISM OF ACTION OF IVIG

How does IVIG work in DM? Among the known mechanisms of action of IVIG, at least four appear to be relevant to the improvement of our patients. IVIG does not work the same way in every disease, and even in the same disease there is more than one factor that plays a role; perhaps one of those factors predominates. First, IVIG contains soluble CD4, CD8, and HLA-DR. It is possible, therefore, that the HLA-DR in the IVIG may have interfered with antigen recognition. Second, IVIG inhibits the activation of cytokines. Certain cytokines, especially TNF-c~ and IL-1 secreted by activated macrophages or T lymphocytes, can be toxic to the muscle cells. Thus, IVIG may exert its beneficial effect by interfering with release of cytokines. We have evidence that IVIG can even inhibit the toxic effect of IL-1 in human myotubes. Third, IVIG can block Fc receptors. Macrophages, which adhere to muscle via the Fc receptors, may exert a toxic effect directly to the muscle fiber.

In addition, Fc receptors exist on the sarcolemma of the muscle fibers. If IVIG blocks these receptors, it may block the attachment of macrophages or putative antibodies to the muscle. This hypothesis is attractive because examination of the repeat biopsies demonstrated a significant amount of IgG around the muscle fibers and the capillaries.

The fourth possible mechanism of action is through the inhibition of complement. In a classic study performed by Drs. Frank and Basta, IVIG was shown to prevent Forssman shock in guinea pigs. Forssman shock is a complement-mediated microvasculopathy, similar to DM. We speculated that if IVIG had an effect on Fig. 3. Immunocytochemistry of muscle stained for C3bNEO before therapy (A) and after therapy (B). Note the disappearance of complement C3bNEO after IVIG therapy. complement, it may have inhibited the activation of C3, formation of active complement C3b and C3bNEO fragments, and deposition of MAC on the muscle capillaries.

For MAC formation, first, there is activation of C3, which is then incorporated into C3b and, via a C5 convertase, forms MAC.

Using an in vitro assay and coded samples, we found that before therapy the patients' serum has a high C3 uptake. After IVIG there was a very dramatic inhibition of C3 uptake by sensitized erythrocytes only by the serum of the patients who received IVIG and not placebo (23). The C3b neoantigen, which is exposed when C3b is incorporated into an immune complex and is immune complex specific, was found deposited on the muscle capillaries (Fig. 3A). After therapy, no deposits could be found (Fig. 3B). The same was true for MAC. Before therapy, there were several capillaries with MAC deposits, but after IVIG, there were none. These observations indicate that IVIG has inhibited the uptake of C3 and has intercepted the formation of MAC at the C5 convertase assembly stage.

Of interest, the dramatic reduction in C3 uptake began 2 days after the IVIG infusion but rebounded to the pretreatment values by the end of the first month. These kinetic data correspond to the duration of the patients' clinical response, which does not last more than 6 weeks. The patients need to be re-treated to maintain improvement.

In summary, WIG is effective in a number of patients with active DM, resulting in significant clinical improvement and resolution of histo-and immuno-pathologic findings. Whether IVIG is also effective in PM and IBM is currently under study.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I would like to express my appreciation to all my Fellows, who have helped with the care of my patients, and to Dr. Isabel Illa, who helped with immunocytochemistry.

