Co-localization of amyloid-associated proteins with amyloid 13 in rat soleus muscle in chloroquine-induced myopathy: a possible model for amyloid/3 formation in Alzheimer's disease

Chloroquine, a potent lysosomotropic agent, induces myopathy in experimental animals similar to rimmed vacuole (RV) myopathy in humans. The abnormal accumulation of amyloid fl protein (A fl), which is the invariable pathological alterations in the brains affected by Alzheimer's disease (AD), has been demonstrated in denervated soleus muscle fibers in chloroquine-induced myopathy in rats. In AD affected brains, a variety of additional proteins are associated with the extracellular deposition of A/3, which leads to the intracellular accumulation of neurofibrillary tangles and finally to neuronal death. In this study, we demonstrate that amyloid-associated proteins, al-antichymotrypsin, apolipoprotein E, SP-40,40 and ubiquitin co-localize with A/3 in vacuolated muscle fibers in chloroquine-induced myopathy. There are striking similarities in immunopathology between experimental RV myopathy and AD. Chloroquine-induced myopathy in rats provides a suitable model not only to obtain insight into the basic mechanisms underlying RV formation in muscle, but also to understand amyloid precursor protein processing into A/3, and the role of amyloid-associated proteins in terms of the pathogenesis of AD.

I. Introduction

The deposition of amyloid /3 protein (A/3) in the brain and cerebral blood vessels is the invariable pathological alteration of the Alzheimer's disease (AD). A/3 is ~ 40-43 amino acid peptide, generated from amyloid precursor protein (APP), an integral membrane protein, by proteolytic cleavages that vary slightly at the C-terminus [15,16,24,28]. The extracellular deposition of A/3 precedes the intracellular accumulation of neurofibrillary tangles (NFT), which may lead to neuronal dysfunction and finally neuronal death.

A variety of additional proteins are known to be associated with A/3 deposition, for example, apolipoprotein E (apoE), apolipoprotein J (SP-40,40), oq-antichymotrypsin (oq-ACT), ubiquitin, complement factors, amyloid P com-ponents and interleukin-6 [1,9,19,22,23]. Soluble Aft is found in the cerebrospinal fluid and other biological fluids in normal subjects and those with AD [14,25,27]. Although these amyloid-associated proteins are considered to play an important role in Aft deposition or amyloid formation, their significance in the pathogenesis of AD remains unclear.

It had been believed that progressive deposition of A fl was limited to the brain. Askanas et al. however, reported that rimmed vacuoles (RVs) in muscle fibers of patients with inclusion body myositis (IBM) contain abnormally accumulated Aft and the N-and C-terminal regions of APP [2,3]. The lysosomal pathway has been assumed to be involved to a certain extent in the formation of RV. It is well-known that chloroquine, a potent lysosomotropic agent, induces myopathy similar to RV myopathy in humans and experimental animals. Very recently, the abnormal accumulation of A/3 has been demonstrated in dener-vated soleus muscle fibers in chloroquine-induced myopathy in rats [21,30]. Moreow~r, in vacuolated muscle fibers, Aft immunoreactivity co-localizes with cathepsin D, a marker enzyme for lysosomes [30]. Interestingly, it has been shown that amyloid-associated proteins, c~I-ACT and apoE, are present in RVs [4,8]. Tau protein and ubiquitin, both components of NFT, which is another characteristic pathological alteration observed in AD, are also abnormally accumulated in vacuolated muscle fibers [5][6][7].

In this study, we report that apoE, SP-40,40, oq-ACT and ubiquitin co-localize with A/3 immunoreactivity in vacuolated muscle fibers in chloroquine-induced myopathy in rats. It is evident that there are striking similarities in immunopathology between RV myopathy and A/3 depositions seen in AD affected brains. Chloroquine-induced myopathy in rats will provide an useful experimental model to understand the role of the amyloid-associated proteins and basic mechaniisms underlying AD development.

Materials and methods

Animals

The experimental rats were produced as described elsewhere [17,30]. Briefly, the right hindleg of adult male Wister rats (initial body weight 200-250 g) was dener-vated by ligation of the sciatic nerve. Chloroquine diphosphate salt (Sigma), 50 mg/kg of body weight, was injected i.p. once a day into the half of experimental rats from the day after ligation. The rest of the rats were injected with an equal volume of 0.9% saline after the same surgical manipulation. The histochemical and immunohistochemical studies were made on denervated (right) soleus muscles from saline and chloroquine treated rats on days 0, 7, 10, 14, 21, 28 after the initial injection.

Histochemical study

For histochemical study, the soleus muscles of the right legs were frozen in isopentane cooled in liquid N z. Transverse cryostat sections, 8 /zm in thickness, were stained with hematoxylin-eosin and modified Gomori-trichrome.

Antibodies

Monoclonal antibodies (mcAbs) against APP regions used in this study were described elsewhere [29]. In short, they were raised in mice by immunization of synthetic peptides comprising deduced amino acid sequences from a human APP cDNA [16]; anti-N-terminus-1 (NT-1), amino acid residues 40-59, anti-Aft, the first 9 residues of Aft (amino acid residues 672-680, A/31-9, 90/12), anti-Cterminus-2 (CT-2), amino acid residues 751-770, respectively. A polyclonal anti-SP-40,40 was raised in rabbit by injection of purified protein admixed with Freund's com- plete adjuvant directly into popliteal lymphonodes as described Goudie et al [12]. The SP-40,40 was purified from pooled human sera according to the method of Wilson et al [31], with a minor modification. To render the antiserum monospecific for SP-40,40, it was passed repeatedly through a Sepharose 4B column coupled with SP-40,40, depleted human serum. The SP-40,40 depleted serum was prepared by passing pooled human serum extensively through a Sepharose 4B column coupled with aggregated human IgG which was made by treating purified IgG with 1 mM glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M borate, pH 8.0 [31]. The monospecificity of the antiserum was tested by immunoblot in that human serum was electrophoresed in 10% SDS-PAGE and electrotransferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. Rabbit antisera to apoE, t~t-ACT, ubiquitin and cathepsin D were products of Chemicon, Calbiochem, DAKOPATTS and Cosmo Bio Chem., respectively.

lmmunohistochemical studies

Transverse serial paraffin sections were stained according to the standard streptavidin-biotin peroxidase technique using a Vectastain ABC kit (PK-4000, Vector Lab. Burlingame, CA). Briefly, deparaffinized tissue sections were treated with 99% formic acid for 1 min. Endogenous peroxidase was inhibited by 0.3% hydrogen peroxide (H202) in methanol for 30 min. After washing with 10 mM phosphate buffered saline pH7.4 (PBS), the sections were incubated with 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) for over night to eliminate nonspecific binding. The sections were incubated in primary antibodies diluted 1:100~ 1:1000 with PBS for 1 h. After thorough rinsing with PBS, the sections were incubated in biotinylated secondary antibody for 1 h, rinsed thoroughly with PBS and then incubated in streptavidin-biotin-horseradish peroxidase for 1 h. The sections were finally reacted with 0.1% 3'3-diaminobenzidine in the presence of 0.003% H202 and couterstained with hematoxylin.

Specificities of mcAbs were determined by: (1) applying PBS instead of the primary antibodies, (2) replacing the primary antibodies with non-immune serum and (3) absorbing the primary antibodies with purified apoE (Chemicon), SP-40,40, ai-ACT (Calbiochem) and synthetic peptides (NT-1, A/31-9 and CT-2).

Results

Histochemical findings in soleus muscles

In denervated soleus muscles of experimental chloroquine treated rats, by day 7 after the initial injection, Fig. 2. Photomicrographs of transverse serial sections of rat soleus muscle after 14 days of chloroquine treatment using HE staining (A) and immunostaining using anti-N-terminus APP region; (amino acid residues 40-59) (B), A/3; (amino acid residues 672-680) (C) and C-terminus APP region; (amino acid residues 751-770) (D) antibodies. Arrows indicate immunostained vacuoles which appear to be the same vacuoles in the serial section series. Bar = 30 /xm. atrophied fibers were observed which were scattered or grouped in small clusters. Vacuoles irregular in shape appeared in the middle or just under the surface of the atrophied fibers. Some vacuole rims and lumens were stained but others were not stained with modified Gomoritrichrome. A slight increase in connective tissue was seen. (Fig. 1A). By day 10, angulated fibers and RVs increased in number and RVs became conspicuous (Fig. 1B). By day 14, the vacuoles were often rimmed by red granular material when stained with modified Gomori-trichrome. This red granular material was also observed in the lumen and cytoplasm adjacent to the vacuoles (Fig. 1C). After 21 days, there were scattered necrotic and regenerating fibers. Destruction of muscle became prominent. The atrophied fibers grouped in large clusters. The vacuoles within the affected muscle fiber increased in number but stained vacuole rims and lumens decreased in number (Fig. 1D). After day 7, connective tissue progressively increased at each time point.

Immunocytochemical studies

A variety of immunostaining patterns were observed with mcAbs against various APP regions in serial sections of the denervated soleus muscles after 14 days of chloroquine treatment. Numerous vacuoles of varying sizes, which were also stained by HE (Fig. 2A), strongly reacted with mcAbs NT-1, Aft and CT-2 (Fig. 2B-D tively). Heterogeneous material surrounding the vacuoles contained strongly stained granular bodies and usually noticeably reacted with all three mcAbs. Abundant nonvacuole structures of irregular size and shape, also reacted at varying intensities with anti-NT-1, A/3 and CT-2. In the same vacuoles in the serial sections, membranous materials of irregular size and shape adjacent to the vacuoles and materials within the lumen of the vacuoles reacted at varying intensity with the three mcAbs. There is no significant difference in the staining properties of these mcAbs.

Fig. 3 shows immunostaining of the same serial section series of affected muscle used in Fig. 2, but using anti-apoE, SP-40,40, Aft, cq-ACT, ubiquitin and cathepsin D antibodies (Fig. 3A-F, respectively). Again all of the antibodies strongly stained numerous vacuoles of varying size and shape and non-vacuole structures in the affected fibers. For all of the antibodies, the contents of the vacuoles were not uniformly stained, but the positive immunoreactions were located in basically the same structures but to varying intensities. Subtle differences in immunostaining were observed with these antibodies. The differences were especially pronounced in finely stained materials surrounding the strongly stained vacuoles for anti-SP-40,40 and oq-ACT antibodies (Fig. 3B,D). Vacuoles reacted strongly with the anti-apoE antibody (Fig. 3A). The immunolocalization of apoE was found in small and large clusters and was quite similar to that obtained by anti-A 13 antibody (Fig. 3A, C). This is also the case for anti-SP-40,40, ct 1-ACT and ubiquitin antibodies.

All these immunoreactions were abolished when the primary antibody was omitted or replaced by a non-immune serum or primary antibodies were absorbed with their antigens (data not shown).

Discussion

The chloroquine-induced rat myopathy becomes usefull model to study APP processing into A/3. As mentioned, the abnormal accumulation of A/3 has been demonstrated in denervated soleus muscle [21,30]. APP fragments, Nand C-terminus of APP, tau protein and ubiquitin were reported to co-localize with A/3 in the vacuolated muscle fibers in chloroquine treated rats recently [21]. This is true in this study. Askanas et al. intensively studied the nature of A/3 immunoreactivity in vacuolated muscle fibers of patients with IBM. They demonstrated that RVs contain materials reacting with anti-APP N-and C-terminus antibodies in addition to anti-A/3 antibody [2,3]. Therefore, it needs to be determined whether or not A/3 is cleaved from APP in vacuolated muscle in this chloroquine-induced rat myopathy.

The important observations in this study are that major components of amyloid-associated proteins tested, ApoE, SP-40,40, oq-ACT immunoreactivities are shown to colocalize with those of Aft, and APP regions, N-and C-terminals of APP in vacuolated muscle fibers, although slight differences in immunostaining were observed when these so-called amyloid-associated protein's mcAbs were applied.

A specific serine protease inhibitor, Otl-ACT, is a component of amyloid deposits found in the cores of neuritic plaques and in the walls of meningeal and cortical blood vessels in AD brains [1]. As only limited number of other protease inhibitors are detected in amyloid deposits in AD brains, c~I-ACT localization is characteristic and may play a role in the formation of Alzheimer amyloid deposits [18,26]. Namba et al. reported that apoE is present in cerebral amyloid deposits in both senile and kuru plaques, cerebrovascular amyloid and paired helical filaments (PHFs) [22]. Diedrich et al. reported that in AD affected brain the mRNA levels of apoE and cathepsin D increases in astrocytes associated with neuropathological alterations and expression of apoE and cathepsin D is closely related with A/3 deposition [10]. SP-40,40 is a widely distributed and well-conserved heterodimeric multifunctional protein. SP-40,40 expression increases in case of cell injury, cell death, or during the tissue repair. It has been reported that SP-40,40 is found in amyloid deposits in AD brain and that SP-40,40, as well as oq-ACT, is most likely produced by astrocytes [9,19]. In vacuolated muscle fibers, however, the localization of SP-40,40 has not been determined to our knowledge. Our present study, for the first time, demonstrates that SP-40,40 is localized in vacuolated muscle fibers. Ubiquitin has been identified as a component of PHFs by immunoblot and immunohistochemical analysis of the soluble fraction of brain homogenate [20]. Perry et al. reported that ubiquitin is covalently associated with insoluble PHFs and is also found in senile plaques [23]. It is known that A/3 is a normal soluble component of cerebrospinal fluid and other biological fluids [14,25,27]. However, the mechanism of A/3 deposition and the putative role of the amyloid-associated proteins in the pathogenesis of amyloid deposition is unsolved [18,26,32].

There is evidence suggesting that the lysosomal pathway is involved in A/3 production or amyloid formation [11,13,29]. It is well-known that chloroquine induces RV myopathy in humans and experimental animals. Focal destruction of muscle fibers and formation of RVs are possibly the result of autophagic digestion of muscle fibers by lysosomal proteolytic enzymes [17]. This study using chloroquine-induced myopathy provides more evidence that supports the possible involvement of the lysosomal pathway in A/3 formation.

We present immunohistochemical evidence that in vacuolated muscle fibers in chloroquine-induced myopathy, apoE, SP-40,40, oq-ACT and ubiquitin are accumulated, 'together with both A/3 immunoreactivities and cathepsin D. There are striking similarities between immunohistopathological findings in RVs in chloroquine-induced myopathy and amyloid deposits in AD. Since there have been no suitable models for studying A/3 production, this chloroquine-induced myopathy in rats provides a useful model not only to obtain in,;ight into the basic mechanisms leading to RV formation in muscle, but also to understand APP processing into A/3, and the role of amyloid-associated proteins in terms of the pathogenesis of AD.

Acknowledgements

This work was partially supported by the ministry of Education, Science and Culture of Japan (Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research 05670817 and 06857066).

Fig. 1 .1Fig. 1. Photomicrographs of tmnsw~.rse cryostat sections of denervated rat 8oleus muscle on days 7 (A), 10 (B), 14 (C) and 21 (D) after chloroquine treatment, stained with modified Gomori-trichrome. Arrows indicate the vacuoles rimmed by red granular material. Bar = 30 /xm.

Fig. 3 .3Fig. 3. Photomicrographs of the same set of serial sections used in Fig. 2-immunostained using anti-apoE (A), SP-40,40 (B), Aft (C), al-ACT (D), ubiquitin (E) and cathepsin D (F) ,tntibodies. Arrows indicate immunostained vacuoles which appear to be the same vacuoles in the serial section series. Arrowheads indicate are anti-SP-40,40 (B), al-ACT (D) immunostained fine structures surrounding the vacuoles. Bar = 30 /zm.

