Clinical benefits and immunopathological correlates of intravenous immune globulin in the treatment of inflammatory myopathies

High-dose intravenous immune globulin (IVIG) is emerging as a promising therapy for patients with inflammatory myopathies who have become unresponsive to, or cannot tolerate, conventional therapies. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled study, using objective criteria for improvement, IVIG demonstrated moderate to dramatic improvement in 75% of the patients with dermatomyositis. Preliminary results from a controlled study in inclusion-body myositis show that IVIG may also exert a mild benefit, but only in a small number of patients and in certain muscle groups. In some patients with polymyositis, IVIG is reported to be of benefit but controlled studies have not yet been completed. Immunocytochemical, immunological and in vitro studies on the patients' repeated muscle biopsies and follow-up sera showed that IVIG exert its action in inflammatory myopathies by: (i) inhibiting myotoxic cytokines, such as TNF-a and IL-l; (ii) blockade of Fe receptors on endomysia! macrophages interfering with Fe receptor-mediated phagocytosis; and (iii) inhibiting the uptake of C3 and intercepting the formation and deposition of membranolytic attack complex on the endomysia! capillaries.

Keywords inflammatory myopathies polymyositis dermatomyositis inclusion-body myositis intravenous immune globulin

INTRODUCTION

Clinical, laboratory, prognostic, therapeutic, demographic, histological, and immunopathological criteria separate the inflammatory myopathies into three distinct subsets: polymyositis (PM), dermatomyositis (DM) and inclusion-body myositis (IBM) [1-9]. Although the triggering agents are unknown, autoimmune mechanisms are implicated in the cause of these conditions as supported by their association with other putative or definite autoimmune diseases or viruses, the evidence for a T-cell mediated myocytotoxicity or complement-mediated microangiopathy, and the presence of various autoantibodies [1 -9]. The underlying immunopathogenesis has been the basis for treating the inflammatory myopathies with immunosuppressive drugs.

Clinical experience suggests that patients with PM and DM respond to prednisone to some degree and for a period of time. In some patients the response may be dramatic and, if prudently used, prednisone may have a long-lasting effect with minimal side-effects. In others, however, the response is mild to moderate, and in still others the steroid-induced side-effects are severe, necessitating the need for other immunosuppressive drugs. Azathioprine, methotrexate or cyclosporin, the most commonly used immunosuppressants [10][11][12][13][14], offer a mild, or at the very best a modest benefit, but with considerable toxicity. Plasmapheresis is ineffective [15]  © 1996 Blackwell Science Ltd rarely effective and mostly in patients with interstitial lung disease [16][17]. The need for better agents has prompted the use of high-dose intravenous immune globulin (IVIG), an immunomodulating drug that is prohibitively expensive, but is well tolerated and has minimal toxicity.

In case reports and uncontrolled series, IVIG has been reported to be effective in up to 60-70% of patients lumped together as suffering from PM and DM [18][19][20][21]. The Jack of controlled trials, the high cost of IVIG and the heterogenous causes of PM, DM and IBM prompted us to conduct separate controlled trials for each condition. Using objective measurements of muscle strength, unbiased randomization, and bona fide diagnoses utilizing a muscle biopsy prior to treatment and repeated biopsies after therapy, the main goal was not only to establish efficacy of )VIG, but also to understand its mechanisms of action.

EFFECT OF IVIG IN DERMATOMYOSITIS (DM)

DM is an acquired inflammatory disease that affects the skeletal muscles, resulting in proximal muscle weakness, and the skin, causing a characteristic violaceous rash on the face, chest, knees, back and the knuckles of the fingers [1-7]. Dilated or infarcted capillaries at the base of the fingernails are frequently present [1][2][3][4][5][6][7]. Creatine kinase levels can be normal or very high. The muscle biopsy shows endomysia! inflammation which is predominantly perivascular or in the interfascicular septae and around, rather than within, the fascicles. The intramuscular blood vessels show endothelial hyperplasia with tubuloreticular profiles, fibrin thrombi, especially in children, and obliteration of capillaries [3,6]. The earliest lesion that precedes inflammation or structural changes in the muscle fibres is the deposition of the complement C5b-9 membranolytic attack complex (MAC) on the intramuscular capillaries [3][4][5][6]22]. This is followed by necrosis and marked reduction in the number of capillaries per muscle fibre, resulting in ischaemia and muscle fibre destruction that often resembles microinfarcts. Circulating levels of MAC can be measured [23]. The antibodies that fix complement fragments on the endothelial cells are not yet known. In addition, various cytokines and adhesion molecules participate in the trafficking of sensitized lymphocytes and macrophages from the intramuscular blood vessels to the muscle fibres [3,6,24,25]. Cytokines may be also responsible for the upregulation of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I antigen, which is found to be expressed prominently in the perifascicular regions, the areas most involved in the immunopathological process [6,24,25]. Considering all the aforementioned immunomediators, an effective therapeutic agent in patients with DM may be directed against cytokines, activated complement fragments, the putative autoantibodies or the activated T cells and macrophages.

The author conducted a double-blind, placebo-controlled study of 15 patients (aged 18-55 years) with biopsy-proven, treatment-resistant dermatomyositis [26]. The patients continued to receive prednisone (mean daily dose, 25 mg) that remained unchanged for three months before and after therapy. They were randomly assigned to receive IVIG (a total of 2 gjkg of body weight divided into two daily infusions of I g/kg/day) or placebo, every month for three months, with the option of crossing over to the alternative therapy for three more months after a wash-out period of one month [26]. Clinical response was gauged by assessing changes in: (i) muscle strength using a modified M RC scale, a well-validated scale in the treatment of neuromuscular disorders; (ii) scores of neuromuscular symptoms that provide a picture of the daily living activities; and (iii) the rash, using photography under the same lighting conditions. As described previously [26], improvement was defined on the basis of changes from baseline to end of treatment in the mean scores for all patients randomized to IVIG compared to placebo. For individual patients, improvement was defined as major when a change of more than 5 points in the total MRC and total symptoms score was noted, and as mild when a change from 3 to 5 points was noted. These very conservative figures were based on a previous study which demonstrated that an improvement of UJJ to 2 MRC points can be seen with placebo also [17].

Of the 15 patients, eight were assigned to IVIG and seven to placebo. Their scores at randomization and the mean disease duration in years were similar in both groups. The patients randomized to IVIG had a significant improvement in the scores of muscle strength, from a mean of 76•6 ± 5• 7 to 84•6 ± 4•6, and in the neuromuscular symptoms scores, from a mean of 44 ± 8•2 to 51-4 ± 6. In contrast, the seven patients assigned to placebo did not change and their scores remained the same, from 78•6 ± 6•3 to 78•6 ± 8•2 and 45•9 ± 9•0 to 45•7 ± 11•3. The differences in scores between baseline and end of treatment among IVIG and placebo-treated patients was significant (P < 0•018 for muscle strength and P < 0•035 for neuromuscular symptoms). With crossovers, a total of 12 patients received IVIG. Of those, nine with severe disabilities ------had a major improvement to nearly normal function. The mean muscle-strength scores in these nine patients increased from 74•5 ±4•9 to 84•7 ± 4•5. Their neuromuscular symptoms also improved significantly, from 38•6 ± 5•9 to 51•0 ± 8•0. Two of the other three patients had mild improvement, and one had no change in his condition. Of II placebo-treated patients, none had major improvement, three had mild improvement, three had no change in their condition, and five worsened [26].

The improvement became noticeable about 15 days after the first IVIG infusion, but it was clear only after the second infusion, and definitive by the third. Only two of the responders reached their peak after the second infusion; the rest peaked between the second and third infusions. Eight patients had marked clearance of the active violaceous rash, or the chronic, scaly eruptions on their knuckles, which often preceded or coincided with the improvement of muscle strength. Serum creatine kinase, elevated up to ten-fold in seven of the IVIGtreated patients, fell by 50% after the first infusion and decreased further or normalized by the second infusion. Creatine kinase remained elevated, was unchanged, or increased during placebo, and returned to baseline 6-10 weeks after the IVIG-treated patients crossed over to placebo or the IVIG infusions were stopped.

In open-labelled infusions, the benefit of IVIG was also documented using quantitative muscle strength testing, which measures changes in muscle strength in Newtons. As shown in Table I for a representative patient, the improvement is noted after the first infusion and continues through the second [27].

Patients tolerated the IVIG infusions well. In two patients, aseptic meningitis recurred with each infusion, necessitating treatment with narcotics. Both of these patients, who showed major improvement, stated that the benefit from IVIG far outweighed this adverse effect. Overall, the patients who noted major improvement felt that IVIG was the only therapy that had had a serious impact on their lives, without troublesome• adverse effects, since the onset of their disease. The patients who managed to get the drug required an infusion approximately every 6 weeks. Now, three years later, most of them continue to respond, although not as well as in the beginning of the study, presumably because of further progression of their disease.

© 1995   t P = 0•04 (ANOVA) for comparison with pre-treatment value.

t P = 0•01 (AN<WA) for comparison with pre-treatment value.

Repeated muscle hiopsies

In five patients who showed major improvement after the third infusion, the author performed repeat open muscle biopsies on the biceps muscle opposite the one used for the pre-treatment biopsy. Before the code was broken, the pre-treatment and post-treatment biopsies were processed for muscle enzyme histochemistry and immunocytochemistry in an immunoperoxidase technique, as described [26], using antibodies against MHC-1, intercellular cell adhesion molecule-I (ICAM-1), Leu-19, to assess the regenerating muscle fibres, and against various lymphocyte subsets. Further, the capillaries were visualized by immunofluorescence and immunoperoxidase staining, using the lectin Ulex europaeus, which stains the capillary endothelial cells (3,6,22]. Not only were the number of capillaries counted but also their diameter was measured in five randomly selected perifascicular regions at a low, original x 40 magnification, each region corresponding to a 6•4 x I 0 4 JLm 2 surface area. This allowed us to survey the capillaries in a large surface area of the whole muscle specimen, as described [26]. In the same field and the same sections, the total number of muscle fibres was also counted, and their size was assessed by measuring their diameters lengthwise and crosswise. Furthermore, the ratio of muscle fibres to capillaries was calculated in the same areas and compared not only with pretreatment biopsies but also with five biopsies from patients with limb-girdle dystrophies.

The repeat biopsies showed a marked improvement in muscle histology compared with the pre-IVIG biopsies [26]. As shown in Table 2, the mean number of muscle fibres, counted in the five regions mentioned earlier in all patients, decreased owing to an increase in muscle fibre diameter, from a mean of 54•0 ± IIJLm to 71•0 ± I5J~m (P < 0•04) (Table 2).

No endomysia) inflammatory infiltrates were noted, except for sparse CDS+ cells in two specimens with the most prominent pretreatment inflammation. The regenerating (Leu-19-positive) muscle fibres, prominent before therapy, were now sparse (Fig. I). The mean number of capillaries increased and their mean diameter decreased from 11•0 ± 3 to 7-4 ± 2 (normal, 6•5 ± 0•1) (P < 0•01), (Table 2). The mean ratio of muscle fibre to capillaries also decreased from 3•4 to 1•5 (normal 1•2). and normalized in three patients.

MECHANISMS OF ACTION OF IVIG IN DERMATOMYOSITIS

Among the various actions of IVIG, those that arc most relevant in DM are: (i) the effect on cytokines; (ii) the FeR blockade; and (iii) the effect on complement fragment deposition.

(i) Effi•ct on cytokines IVIG contains neutralizing antibodies to various cytokincs, including IL-l, IL-2, IL-6, and TNF-n [28]. In addition, by binding to the FcRs on the activated macrophages the infused IgG can downrcgulate cytokine secretion [28). Cytokincs, such as IL-l or TNF-(3, arc toxic to human myotubcs [29) and uprcgulate the in l'ilro expression of DR or ICAM-1 molecules on the surface of unstimulated human myotubcs [30). Up to 30% of the myotubes in culture can be rescued from the toxic effect of IL-l when IVIG is placed in the medium (Dalakas MC.

•Morizon MEL, unpubl. obs.). In the same in vitro system, it was found that IVIG downregulatcs the interferon-induced expression of DR or ICAM-1 on the myotubes. Consistent with these in 1•itro observations, in the repeat muscle biopsies from the DM patients we have observed that IVIG had a remarkable effect in downrcgulating the expression of M HC-1 and I CAM-I on the surface of muscle fibres and the blood vessels [26). Because !CAM-I is overexpresscd on the endothelial cells and it is the ligand for LFA-1 ,,blockade of !CAM-I will prevent the exit of activated T cells from the capillaries towards the muscle fibres.

( ii) FeR hlock a de Following infusion of IVIG, the IgG ts found around the muscle fibres, the endomysia) tissue and the endomysia) blood vessels and capillaries (Fig. 2), which contain FcRs for IgG. Coating of these areas with the infused IgG could potentially exert partial blockade of the FcRs. FcRs for IgG arc also present in up to 99% of the activated macrophages that invade the muscle fibres [31). IVIG exerts partial blockade in up to 30% of the FcRs on the endomysia I macrophages (Dalakas MC, Morizon MEL, unpubl. data). Such an effect is shown in two serial sections of a muscle biopsy from a patient after -. . : -  infusion with IVIG (Fig. 3). This blockade may result in internalization or modulation of the receptors, preventing their attachment to the muscle fibres and inhib~ting the Fcreceptor-mediated phagocytosis.

(iii) Efrect 011 complemellt .

Using an in 1•itro radioimmune C3 uptake assay it has been shown that IVIG inhibits the deposition of activated C3b and C4b fragments to target cells. The post-IVIG serum. but not the post-placebo serum, from the OM patients treated with IVIG inhibits the in vitro C3 uptake by 70-90%, two days after the infusion [23]. The percentage of inhibition of the C3 uptake returns to the baseline level 30 days later, corresponding roughly to the duration of the clinical benefit. In the repeat muscle biopsies (23], the C3bNEO (neoantigen) and MAC deposits are not detected in the endomysia! capillaries, suggesting that IVIG inhibits the incorporation of C3 into the C5 convertase assembly, preventing the formation of C3bNEO and intercepting the formation and deposition of MAC. Con-

EFFICACY OF IVIG IN POLYMYOSITIS

In PM and IBM. there is evidence not of microangiopathy and muscle ischemia, as in OM, but of an antigen-directed cytotoxicity mediated by cytotoxic T cells (1- 7,32,33]. This conclusion is supported by the presence of COS+ T cells, which along with macrophages, initially surround healthy, non-necrotic muscle fibres and eventually invade and destroy them. The muscle fibres, either next to or remote from the areas of inflammation, strongly express the MHC class I antigen, which is absent from the sarcolemma of normal muscle fibres. Because cytotoxic T cells recognize antigenic targets in association with MHC-1 antigen, the primary immunopathological mechanism in PM and IBM is T-cell mediated and MHC-1 antigen restricted.

In uncontrolled studies, IVIG has been shown to be effective in PM (18-21]; however, controlled studies using quantitative muscle tests and documentation of the disease with muscle biopsies prior to therapy have not been done. These clinical trials in PM are still ongoing. Although a control study in PM was started four years ago, the recruitment rate is very slow because, most of the time, the steroid-resistant patients referred to the author with presumed PM turn out to have IBM or another disease. In the author's experience, PM in the absence of another collagen-vascular disease is rare compared to IBM. sequently, IVIG leads to prevention of the MAC-induced Fig. 2 . Cross-section of a muscle biopsy from a patient with DM before osmotic lysis of the capillaries, allowing for neovascularization therapy (a) and 1 5 days after IVIG infusion (b) stained with antihuman to occur and for the reversal of the ischemic process, as lgG. Before therapy, there is minimal IgG deposition in the endomysia I demonstrated by the normalization of the capillaries and the parenchyma. After therapy, the infused lgG has markedly penetrated muscle fibre diameter in the repeat muscle biopsies (Table 2).

the endomysia! and perimysial spaces.

(  

EFFICACY OF IVIG IN INCLUSION-BODY MYOSITIS

Inclusion-body myositis (IBM) is the most common acquired inflammatory myopathy in patients more than 50 years old. The author has seen more than 120 cases in only the last four years. The condition presents with selective atrophy of forearm flexor muscles, frequent falls, atrophy of the quadricep muscles and dysphagia [8,9]. The histological hallmarks of IBM are: (i) basophilic granular inclusions distributed around the edge of slit-like vacuoles (rimmed vacuoles); (ii) angulated or round fibres, often in small groups; (iii) eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusions; (iv) spa•rse-to-prominent endomysia! inflammation in a pattern identical to that seen in PM; and (v) Congo-red or crystal violet-positive amyloid deposits next to the vacuoles in up to 3% of the vacuolated fibres. IVIG has been effective in some patients with IBM. In an open pilot trial, three of four of our patients have responded [34]. Although the improvement was not dramatic, it made a difference in the patients' life styles. Preliminary results from a controlled, double-blind study for IBM, which was just completed, demonstrated a mild to moderate benefit in up to one-third of the patients [35]. Demonstrating even a mild improvement will be important because in our experience, IBM patients do not respond to immunosuppressive therapies.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

I express my thanks to Drs M.E.L. Monzon and I. lila for their help with immunocytochemical preparations.

and cyclophosphamide is Correspondence: Dr M. C. Da1akas, NINDS, NIH, Building 10, Room 4N248, 10 Center Drive, MSC 1382, Bethesda, MD 20892-1382, USA.

*Mean number of muscle fibres or capillaries in five randomly selected perifascicular regions at a low, original x40 magnification, each region corresponding to a 6•4 x I 0 4 11m 2 surface area (see text for details).

,

Fig. I .IFig. I. Cross-section of a muscle biopsy from a patient with DM before therapy (a) and after IVIG treatment (b) stained with the monoclonal antibody Leu-19, which identifies regenerating muscle fibres. Prior to therapy, there is prominent peri fascicular atrophy with many small-insize Leu-19-positive fibres. After therapy. the size of the muscle fibres has increased and only rare Leu-19-positive fibres arc noted. Both figures are of the same magnification ( x 280).

Fig. 3 .3Fig. 3. Serial cross-sections of a muscle biopsy from a patient with polymyositis, 15 days after JVIG infusion, stained with antibodies against macrophages (a) and against the FeR for JgG (b). Up to 30% of the Fe receptors on the macrophages, visualized in (a), have been blocked by the IVIG, as shown in (b).

Table 1 .1Quantitative muscle strength testing of a patient with dermatomyositis before and after two consecutive monthly infusions with high-dose intravenous immunoglobulinBaseline (Rx #I)Rx #2Post Rx #2Muscle group(15 Dec 93)(12 Jan 94)(7 Feb 94)

Table 2 .2Blackwell Science Ltd, Clinical and Experimental Immunology, 104, Suppl. I :55-60 13652249, 1996, S1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cei.1996.104.s1.55 by University Of Illinois At Urbana Champaign, Wiley Online Library on [10/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License Effect of IYIG on histological characteristics in the muscles of patients with dermatomyositisIVIG in inflammatory myopathies57Pre-treatmentPost-treatment(11 = 5)(n = 5)Muscle fibres*34•2 ± 15•824•8 ± 8Muscle fibre diameter (/1m) Capillaries*54± II 13•5 ± 371 ± I5t 18•2 ±4•8(Normal 19•7 ± 6•7)Capillary diameter (/tm)I 1•0 ± 2•8Muscle fibre/capillaries

Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cei.1996.104.s1.55 by University Of Illinois At Urbana Champaign, Wiley Online Library on [10/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License ...., ,, . .. . . . . . .I'.,i :; I '.~t •)([) 1996 Blackwell Science Ltd, Clinical and t):perimelllallmmunology, 104, Suppl. I :55-60 I 13652249, 1996, S1, ... ... . : • , . # ' I .,. A . ~ . , . 0 .... . . . . , .

, 1996, S1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cei.1996.104.s1.55 by University Of Illinois At Urbana Champaign, Wiley Online Library on [10/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License:) 1995 Blackwell Science Ltd, Clinical and Experimental Immunology, 104, Suppl. I :55-60 13652249

