Multiple mitochondrial DNA deletions in sporadic inclusion body myositis: A study of 56 patients

Inclusion body myositis, a chronic inflammatory disorder, is the most common cause of myopathy in adults over the age of 50. Diagnosis is based on clinical features and distinctive morphological findings by both light and electron microscopy. The causes of inclusion body myositis are still unknown. Ultrastructural mitochondrial changes and raggedred fibers are common in patients with sporadic inclusion body myositis, and mutiple mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) deletions have been reported in 3 such patients, suggesting that mtDNA mutations may have a pathogenetic role. We studied 56 patients with sporadic inclusion body myositis, using a combination of clinical, morphological, biochemical, and molecular genetic analyses to determine the frequency and the distribution of mtDNA deletions. Using the polymerase chain reaction, we found multiple mtDNA deletions in 73% of patients, compared to 40% of normal age-matched control subjects and 47% of disease control subjects. The presence of deletions correlated with morphological evidence of ragged-red, cytochrome c oxidase-negative fibers, and with defects of complexes I and IV of the electron transport chain. Although aging may account for a proportion of mtDNA deletions in patients with sporadic inclusion body myositis and control subjects, mtDNA alterations may be accelerated in sporadic inclusion body myositis.

familial forms have been reported, with an autosomal dominant or recessive pattern of inheritance. Because muscle biopsy specimens from patients with familial disease usually lack inflammation, this form of the disorder should be referred to as hereditary inclusion body myopathy (h-IBM) [2, 31. The diagnosis of inclusion body myositis (IBM) is based on clinical and laboratory features, and recognition of the distinctive morphological findings by both light and electron microscopy (EM). In particular, muscle biopsy specimens show inflammatory myopathy with mononuclear cell invasion of nonnecrotic fibers, vacuolated fibers (rimmed vacu-oles), and intracellular amyloid deposits or 15to 18nm tubulofilaments by EM [4-71. These criteria were revised recently and more accurate diagnostic guidelines for definite and possible IBM were proposed (81.

However, rimmed vacuoles and twisted tubulofilamentous inclusions are not specific for IBM, as they have been observed in other neuromuscular disorders, such as oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) Ultrastructural mitochondrial changes [ 12, 131 and ragged-red fibers (RRFs) [14] are commonly observed in sporadic disease, whereas they are rare in familial forms. These changes are typically seen in mitochondrial myopathies and encephalomyopathies, many of which are due to sporadic or inherited defects of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) [ 151.

A recent in situ hybridization study showed the pres- [9-111. ence of deleted m t D N A molecules in cytochrome c oxidase (COX)-deficient fibers from 3 IBM patients [16]. Although deleted genomes were detected by Southern blot in only 1 patient, these findings suggested that m t D N A deletions might have a pathogenetic role in IBM. These findings have now been confirmed in additional patients using a polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based method [ 171.

To determine the frequency and the distribution of m t D N A deletions in s-IBM, and to investigate the relationship between clinical phenotype a n d m t D N A abnormalities, we studied a large series of s-IBM patients by a combination of clinical, morphological, biochemical, and molecular genetic analyses. W e also studied 30 age-matched normal individuals and 46 disease control subjects with other myopathies or encephalomyopathies, including 18 patients with polymyositis and 4 with dermatomyositis.

Materials and Methods

We studied 56 s-IBM patients, 35 men and 21 womcn, with a mean age of 61 t 15 years (range, 30-77 years). For diagnosis, we used established clinical and morphological criteria, including slow progressive and painless muscle weakness of proximal and distal muscles, endomysial inflammatory infiltrates in the muscle biopsy specimen, presence of at least one rimmed vacuole/low-power field, and presence of characteristic intracytoplasniic tubulofilaments on EM.

Control subjects were divided into two groups: Total DNA extraction from muscle, preparation of mtDNA probes using a random primed DNA kit (Boehringer, Mannheim, Germany), and Southern blot analysis were performed as described [ZO]. Briefly, about 2 to 5 pg of total DNA was cut with either PvuII or BdmHI (which linearized mtDNA molecules), run on a 0.8% agarose gel, blotted onto a nylon membrane (Zetaprobe, Riorad, Hercules, CA), and hybridized with 1 to 2 X 106 cpm/ml of total human placental mtDNA probes. Washes were performed according to the nianufacturers' instructions.

Deletions were mapped using a combination of Southern blot, PCR-derived methods, and direct sequencing techniques. To map the deleted areas, total DNA was digested and subjected to electrophoresis as described above, then blotted onto two nylon membranes, and hybridized overnight to a set of probes corresponding to different regions of mtDNA. The fragments used as probes were PCR amplified from mtDNA extracted from normal human muscle, using oligonucleotide primers with nucleotide (nt) positions corresponding to the following Cambridge sequence [21] positions on the heavy (H) or on the light (L) strand, (5'-3'):

( The fragments were purified by Gene Clean (Bio 101, Vista, CA) and labeled as described above. The membranes were stripped before each new hybridization, and then exposed overnight to x-ray film (Kodak-XAR) at -70째C with an intensifying screen, to verify the absence of any previous radioactive signal.

To verify that the additional bands obtained in the Southern blots were not due to DNA degradation, we hybridized our blots with a nuclear 18s ribosomal RNA probe [22]. An added advantage of this procedure was that it also allowed us to rule out primary quantitative defects of mtDNA.

A finer map of the deleted areas was obtained using the "primer shifting" method [23). This technique allowed us to rule out nonspecific PCR amplification and to obtain a better localization of the deleted regions. The following pairs of primers were used on both (H) and (L) strands, (5'-3'): Sequence analysis of the major bands obtained with the fourth, fifth, and sixth pairs of primers was performed to localize the deletion breakpoints [24].

The relative number of delected molecules in 18 IRM patients was estimated by densitonietric scanning of the autoradiograms, using MD-Image Quant software version 3.22 (Molecular Dynamics, Sunnyvale, CA).

The presence of the common deletion of approximately 5.0 kb was quantitated in 20 IBM patients and 18 control subjects (10 normal control subjects and 8 disease control subjects), employing a described I'CR method [ 181. Coamplification of documented nondeleted mtDNA regions (using the same PCR conditions) was performed to ensure uniformity in amplification of wild-type genomes.

In a representative sample of 15 patients, we also excluded the presence of mtDNA point mutations that have been associated with mitochrondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, stroke-like episodes (MELAS) [25, 

Results

The In 26 IBM patients (46%), multiple deletions of mtDNA were evident both by Southern blotting and by PCR. However, PCR revealed deleted genomes in an additional 15 patients, in whom Southern blotting results were negative. Thus, multiple mtDNA deletions were detected in 41 patients, or 73% of the total. No mtDNA deletions were found by Southern blotting in age-matched control subjects, but deletions were seen in 4 disease control subjects. These patients had been diagnosed as having polymyosiris with RRFs. PCR revealed mtDNA deletions in I 2 normal individuals (40%) and in 22 disease control subjects (47%). No primary mtDNA depletion was detected calculating the ratio between mtDNA and nuclear DNA [22].

The pattern of observed deletions was the same in most patients (Fig 2 ): it consisted of the 16.5-kb band, corresponding to wild-type mtDNA, and of a smearing of several smaller bands, some of which, ranging in size from 11.5 to 7.5 kb, were more evident. Figure 3 shows a representative Southern blot pattern. All bands were revealed by the first three probes (total mtDNA, probe 1, and probe 2), while probe 4, which encompassed the genes for ATPase 8 and 6 and for part of COX 111, did not hybridize with the two lower bands of 7.5 and 8.5 kb. Probe 6, which includes a small portion of ND3, transfer RNA (tRNA)*'g, ND4L, ND4, t m ~H ~s , tmAScr(AGY), tmAWCUN) , and part of ND5, hybridized only wirh wild-type DNA, suggesting that those genes are included in all deleted areas.

Better localization of the deletions was obtained by PCR. For example, using primer pairs (5'-3') nt 8274-8305 and nt 13720-13692, a strong band of approximately 0.5 kb, and several less intense bands of up to 1.3 kb were obtained. Primer pairs nt 8274-8305 and nt 15600-15574 gave bands ranging from approximately 2.4 kb to 0.8 kb, while fewer or no bands were obtained with primer pairs nt 8274-8305 and nt 12995-12966, and with pairs nt 9007-9036 and nt 15600-15574. This indicates that most deletions include the region between nt 9000 and nt 13000. In several patients, we also detected a previously reported 3895-bp deletion in the region of the heavy-strand promoter (HSP) region, which, however, spares the lightstrand promoter [31].

Direct sequencing identified the deletion breakpoints of the more intense bands obtained by PCR.

For example, using primer pair e as described already, we identified an approximately 0.5-kb band, indicating the presence of the common deletion of 4977 bp first described by Schon and colleagues [32]. A positive correlation was seen between presence of morphological mitochondrial abnormalities (i.e., RRF/ COX-negative fibers), biochemical impairment of mitochondria] function (complex I and IV deficiencies), and presence of deletions by Southern blot in IBM patients ( p < 0.05). However, we found no correlation between presence of deletions and gender, age, or any of the main clinical features.

Discussion

While the etiology and pathogenesis of s-IBM are unknown, mitochondrial abnormality, as reflected by the presence of W s , is a common finding in muscle biopsy specimens, thus raising the possibility that impaired energy metabolism may play a role in the pathogenesis of this disorder. Even though RRFs are not specific for IBM and are found in muscle biopsy specimens of aged normal individuals, they are more abundant in patients with IBM [33].

Recent studies by Oldfors and coworkers [16,171 documenting the presence of multiple mtDNA deletions in muscle from s-IBM patients prompted us to investigate the frequency of mtDNA rearrangements in a large group of patients. Our series consisted of 56 patients with s-IBM from four institutions, conforming to the clinical and pathological criteria recently established for accurate diagnosis [8]. We confirmed the frequent occurrence of multiple mtDNA deletions in muscle from IBM patients. By Southern blot analysis, which is capable of detecting deletions affecting as few as 1 to 2% of total mitochondrial genomes, 46% of our patients harbored multiple deletions. With the much more sensitive PCR technique, whose power of resolution is considered as low as 0.01% (F. Pallotti and E. A.  [48].

The gene responsible for AD-PEO in a large Finnish family was localized to chromosome 1Oq23-24.3, but two AD-PEO Italian families failed to show linkage with that locus, suggesting genetic heterogeneity [49].

Both the origin of multiple mtDNA deletions and their pathogenic role remain uncertain in other conditions. In s-IBM, a primary pathogenic role appears unlikely for several reasons: (1) Multiple mtDNA deletions are undetectable in a substantial number of patients (27% of our patients did not harbor deleted genomes); (2) in patients with deletions, their abundance does not correlate with clinical severity; (3) patients with AD-PEO or AR-PEO show neither the distribution of weakness that is characteristic of IBM nor the rimmed vacuoles and tubulofilamentous inclusions that are the hallmark changes in IBM muscle biopsy specimens; and (4) conversely, ophthalmoplegia, the signature clinical feature associated with primary mtDNA multiple deletions, is never seen in patients with IBM.

If the intranuclear filaments reflect a primary in- volvement of the nuclei in the pathogenesis of IBM, one of the consequences might be a defect in the same nuclear gene (or genes) involved in AD-PEO and AR-PEO. Aging processes, duration of disease, and their combined effects on oxidative phosphorylation could influence the clinical expression.

It also would be tempting to speculate that the same genes may be responsible for h-IBM. Although multiple deletions appear to be less frequent in patients with h-IBM than in patients with s-IBM [50], this observation has to be confirmed in a larger series of h-IBM patients.

This work was partially funded by National Institutes of Health grants NS 11766 and R01-AG12131, and by grants from the Muscular Dystrophy Association. Dr Santorelli is supported by a scholarship from Telethon-Italia.

We thank Dr Michio Hirano for critical comments

(a) nt 7433-7468 and nt 16060-16033; (b) nt 7955-7979 and nt 16060-16033; (c) nt 7955-7979 and nt 15600-15574; (d) nt 8274-8305 and nt 15600-15574; (e) nt 8274-8305 and nt 13720-13692; (f) nt 8274-8305 and nt 12995-12966; (g) n t 9007-9036 and nt 15600-15574; (h) nt 9744-9767 and nt 184-162; (i) nt 311-322 and nt 4544-4523. PCR conditions were 94째C for 1.0 minute, 65째C for 2.0 minutes, and 72째C for 2.5 minutes, for 25 cycles.

Fig 3 .Fig 4 .34Fig 3. Mapping deletions using Southern blot. Hybridization was performed with total mtDNA and with several other probes, whose positions are shown in the left panel. Details are given in the text.

30 patients, muscle morphology showed rimmed vacuoles in 3% of fibers, on average. Seventy-one percent(40) of IBM patients had RRFs; 52%, COX-negative fibers; and 55%, SDH-hyperreactive fibers (Fig1). In control subjects, only 0.25 f 0.32% of examined fibers were RWs.Analysis of respiratory chain enzyme activities in 43 patients gave normal results in 10 patients (23%), showed partial defects of single enzymes in 21 patients (49%), and partial defects of multiple enzymes in 12 As a group, IBM patients showed com-Fig I . Serial fiozen muscle sections from a patient with inclusion body myositis stained with Gomori trichrome (A), and for the histochemical demonstration of succinate dehydrogenase (B) and cytochrome c oxidase (COX) (C) activities. A jiber1 2 3 4 5678916.5kb-1 l.Skb--) lO.Skb--) E=cFig 2. Southern blot of patients with sporadic inclusion boa)myositis (lanes 1-7) and control subjects (lanes 8 and 9).Besides the 165-kb wild-type band, additional bands (rang-ingfiom 11.5 to 8 kb) correspond to m t D " molecules har-boring deletions of various sizes.Electromy-ography (EMG) showed mixed neurogenic and myo-pathic features in only 15 patients (26%), but in mostpatients myopathic changes predominated. The male-female ratio was 1.7; gender did not seem to influenceclinical features.with ringed vacuoles is indicated by arrows, and two fiberswith massive mitochondrial prolfiration associated with COXdeficiency are indicated by stars. (X 130 before 28% reduc-tion.)Table shows clinical and laboratory findings in the group of s-IBM patients. Mean age at onset was 61 years, with an average duration of illness of 6 years.Weakness was noted in both distal and proximal muscles in 43 patients (76%), and was more pronounced in the distal muscles in 13 patients (23%).In patients (28%).bined defects of complexes I (NADH-dehydrogenase) and IV (COX), with average residual activities of 59% and 51% of the normal means. O n the other hand, citrate synthase activity was increased up to twice normal in 22 patients (51%), suggesting mitochondria1 proliferation.

In 1 patient, we detected a novel deletion of 3985 bp in the HSP region, between nt 502 and nt 4487. Densitornettic analysis of Southern blots showed that deleted mtDNAs accounted for an average of 18.5 Ifi 4.7%(range, 7-32%) of total genomes. By semiquantitativePCR-based methods, the common deletion was sig-nificantly more abundant in a sample of 20 IBM pa-tients than in 10 normal control subjects or in 8 diseasecontrol subjects irrespective of age ( p < 0.05, Fig 4).

Pestronk, B. Frank, unpublished manuscript, 1995). At any rate, our data indicate that multiple mtDNA deletions are more abundant in IBM patients than can be explained by age or concomitantleted mtDNA molecules in IBM patients and controlsubjects we found that multiple deletions accumulatedwith age in both groups, but were more abundant inIBM patients.A comparison of IBM patients with and those with-out deleted genomes showed no apparent correlationbetween percentage of deletions and age at onset orclinical severity. Not surprisingly, the presence of dele-tions correlated with mitochondria1 abnormalities inthe muscle biopsy specimen and with decreased activi-ties of respiratory chain enzymes. Similar morphologi-cal and biochemical changes are seen in muscle frompatients with Kearns-Sayre syndrome (KSS) or sporadicprogressive external ophthalmoplegia (PEO) and inpatients with autosomal dominant PEO (AD-PEO).In these conditions, single or multiple deletions ofmtDNA include one or more tRNA genes and causeoveraIl impairment of mitochondrial protein synthesis,leading to mitochondrial proliferation (RRFs or SDH-hyperreactive fibers) and to decreased activities of thoserespiratory chain complexes that contain mtDNA-encoded subunits. The same mechanism probably op-erates in muscle of IBM patients. Having establishedthat multiple mtDNA deletions are commonly, thoughnot invariably, encountered in s-IBM, and that theydo impair oxidative phosphorylation, a central questionSchon, personal communication, 1995), theis what role, if any, they may have in the pathogenesisproportion of patients showing deletions climbed toof IBM. Multiple mtDNA deletions have been demon-73%. These findings are not unexpected, becausestrated in a variety of conditions, including AD-PEOmtDNA deletions accumulate with age in postmitotic[39-4 11; a recently recognized autosomal recessivetissues such as muscle [34-361. Multiple deletions haveform of PEO and cardiomyopathy (AR-PEO) [42]; aalso been observed in a late-onset form of myopathymitochondrial multisystemic disorder characterized bywith RRFs [37, 381. In addition, the inflammatory fea-PEO, peripheral neuropathy, and intestinal pseudo-tures of muscle in s-IBM raise the possibility that mul-obstruction (MNGIE) [43, 441; and a variety of dis-tiple deletions may be either induced or increased byeases with diverse clinical presentations [45-471. Theinflammation.only conditions in which multiple mtDNA deletionsThus, two sets of control subjects are necessary toappear to represent the primary molecular defect areassess the pathogenic significance of mtDNA deletionsAD-PEO and AR-PEO. Because of the mendelianin IBM: age-matched control subjects and patientsmode of inheritance, both disorders have been classi-with other inflammatory myopathies. It is unlikely thatfied as defects of intergenomic signaling, that is, muta-aging alone can account for the abundance of deletionstions of nuclear genes that either facilitate an intrinsicseen in IBM, because no deletions were detected bypropensity of mtDNA to undergo rearrangements orSouthern blot in age-matched control subjects. Theaffect factors involved in the recognition and elimina-role of inflammation is more difficult to assess becausetion of spontaneously occurring rearrangements4 of 22 patients with inflammatory myopathies hadmultiple mtDNA deletions by Southern blot. All 4positive patients, however, also had prominent RRFs,an unusual feature in muscle biopsy specimens frompatients with typical polymyositis, raising some doubtsabout their clinical classification. These patients withatypical forms are the subject of a separate report (G.inflammation.When we used PCR to assess the abundance of de-Blume, A.

