

We report a hereditary muscle disorder with features of inclusion body myositis (IBM) in two adult sisters with slowly progressive asymmetrical muscle weakness. The findings of light microscopic and ultrastructural investigations of muscle biopsy specimens were consistent with a diagnosis of IBM. Both patients improved and stabilized on immunosuppressive treatment with corticosteroids and azathioprine. This differentiates our patients from other sporadic and familial cases of IBM. Clinical and histological features are described and compared with those of other previously reported families with IBM.

Introduction

Inclusion body myositis (IBM) is a rare inflammatory myopathy of unknown aetiology. Most cases occur sporadically, but a few familial cases have been reported. Clinical features of IBM include slowly progressive, often asymmetrical, weakness of proximal and distal muscles, and dysphagia in about 40% of patients [18]. Sporadic IBM begins in the sixth or seventh decade of life [11,19] with an earlier onset in familial cases. Previous reports of familial IBM have suggested an autosomal dominant pattern restricted to males [22], autosomal recessive inheritance [14] or simple autosomal dominant inheritance with no sex restriction [17]. Light microscopy reveals a variable degree of rimmed vacuoles and inflammatory infiltrates; electron microscopy demonstrates typical cytoplasmic and/or nuclear inclusions in muscle fibres, consisting of 15-18 nm filaments [10]. In some cases separation from non-inflammatory myopathies with rimmed vacuoles can be difficult. Despite identical histological findings in sporadic and hereditary IBM, some familial cases display atypical clinical features including sparing of the quadriceps muscles [16,19] or abnormalities of the white matter of the brain on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or on cranial computed axial tomography (CT) [11,16]. We report the cases of two sisters who responded well to methylprednisolone and azathioprine treatment.

Material and methods

The biopsied muscle specimens were processed according to routine techniques [12,13]. Sections (6 mm) were stained with modified trichrome stain, haematoxylin and eosin, periodic acid-Schiff, and oil red. Enzyme histochemical preparations included acid phosphatase, NADH tetrazolium reductase, alkaline, and acid AT-Pase. Immunohistochemical preparations used antibodies against ubiquitin (DAKO dilution 1:100) [5] and b-A4 amyloid (Boehringer Mannheim, dilution 1:10). Hypertrophy and atrophy factors and variability coefficients were measured and calculated according to Dubowitz and Brooke [13] with a Hewlett Packard computerized program.

The clinical examination of both patients before and after treatment was carried out by M.N. and H.R.

Case reports

Case 1

Clinical presentation

A 60-year-old woman developed asymmetrical, proximal and distal muscle weakness predominantly affecting the lower limbs when aged 55 years. The onset was gradual, and progression was slow, leading to dysphagia 3 years after the first symptoms had started. No other family members except her sister (case 2) suffered from a muscle disorder.

Clinical examination showed moderate atrophy of proximal and distal limb muscles. In the upper extremities, weakness of the deltoid and triceps muscles was moderate, while the biceps muscles and hand and finger extensors were more severely affected. Finger and hand flexors showed only mild weakness. In the lower extremities, the quadriceps and gastrocnemius muscles displayed a marked and nearly symmetrical paresis. Severe atrophy and weakness were seen in the left tibialis anterior muscle with only moderate involvement of the right side (Table 1). Neck muscles were moderately affected. Dysphagia was characterized by difficulty in swallowing solid foods and occasional choking or nasal regurgitation. No weight loss was reported. Sensation was normal. Deep tendon reflexes were absent in the lower and weak in the upper limbs. Electromyography (EMG) performed on deltoid, quadriceps and anterior tibial muscles revealed spontaneous activity at rest with fibrillations and myopathic motor unit potentials. Occasionally, repetitive high frequency motor unit discharges were seen. Nerve conduction studies were normal. Serum creatine kinase (CK) was markedly increased (530 U/l; normal up to 80 U/l). Cranial CT did not reveal any abnormality.

Muscle MRI of both legs was performed with a 1.5 T Gyroscan S 15 (Philips, Eindhoven, The Netherlands). Tl-weighted scans revealed atrophy and fatty degeneration of both sartorius and quadriceps muscles predominantly affecting the vastus lateralis muscle. The left tibialis anterior and gastrocnemius muscles were also affected. T2-weighted MRI showed an increased signal intensity within both quadriceps muscles and within nearly all muscles of the left lower leg compatible with inflammation and oedema. 

Morphology

Light microscopy. Open muscle biopsy was performed on the quadriceps muscle. Frozen sections (6 p.m thick) were stained using standard procedures [13]. In cross-sections, muscle fibres revealed an increased range of fibre diameters with hypertrophic and atrophic fibres, including some small angular fibres (Fig. 1). There was no atrophy of type 1 fibres, whereas the atrophy factor of type 2 fibres was 71. The hypertrophy factor for type 1 fibres was 39, and 71 for type 2 fibres. The ratio of type 1 fibres to type 2 fibres was 48 to 53. In the NADH preparation, several scattered muscle fibres showed an irregular staining pattern. There was an increase in internal nuclei (25%). Numerous autophagic ("rimmed") vacuoles and occasional split fibres were present (Fig. 1). Some fibres contained finely dispersed lipid droplets. Scattered muscle fibres were necrotic with phagocytosis; others were regenerating. An occasional cytoplasmic body was encountered within a muscle fibre that also harboured an autophagic vacuole (Fig. 1). Endomysial fibrosis was minimal. There were a few small inflammatory infiltrates (Fig. 2a, b) within muscle fascicles and around perimysial small vessels. Acid phosphatase activity was present within several interstitial cells and in macrophages inside muscle fibres. Vessel walls appeared regular in structure.

Electron microscopy. While the majority of sarcomeres appeared intact, several muscle fibres contained areas of minicores, frequently scattered across a longitudinally cut muscle fibre with loss of mitochondria and excessive streaming of Z-bands. Nuclei appeared rather large and a few were located in the subsarcolemmal area. Often, the sarcoplasm was rather electron-lucent with only a small electron-dense rim at the periphery. Distinct nucleoli were frequent. Nuclei were round, oval or lobulated. One nucleus contained a large aggregate of randomly arranged filaments of some 20 nm in diameter (Fig. 3). Numerous muscle fibres contained subsarcolemmal regions devoid of sarcomeres, but filled with finely granular material, often aggregates of cytoplasmic glycogen, mitochondria, and dense bodies. Autophagic vacuoles contained myelin-like material and other debris (Fig. 3a). Only rarely were collections of cytoplasmic filaments randomly deposited at the margin of autophagic vacuoles (Fig. 4a, b). The nucleus containing an aggregate of intranuclear filaments was located within a muscle fibre which otherwise appeared normal, but nuclei close to autophagic vacuoles and aggregates of cytoplasmic filaments did not contain filaments. Occasionally, there were empty loops of basal lamina.

Treatment

Immunosuppressive treatment with high-dose corticosteroids (beginning with 500 mg methylprednisolone/day for 5 days) and azathioprine (150 mg/day) was started after muscle biopsy. Dysphagia subsided completely within 3 months.  

Clinical presentation

The 58-year-old sister of case 1 developed slowly progressive proximal and distal muscle atrophy and weakness in all four limbs at the age of 48 years. The pattern of affected muscles was similar to that of her sister. In contrast, the calf muscles were only moderately affected (Table 1). Dysphagia followed several years later and consisted of difficulty in swallowing solid and later also liquid foods. Weight loss of 5 kg within 12 months was reported. Deep tendon reflexes of the lower limbs were diminished. Sensation was normal. Serum CK was elevated (380 U/l). An EMG of the biceps and quadriceps muscles revealed a myopathic pattern and spontaneous activity. The findings of nerve conduction studies were normal.

Discussion

Fig. 5 Case 2. CD8-positive lymphocytic infiltrates, x 640

Morphology

Light microscopy. Open muscle biopsy was performed on the left lateral vastus muscle. On cross-sections, variation in muscle fibre diameters was markedly increased. Variability coefficients were 404 and 388 for type 1 and type 2 fibres, respectively, corroborating the pathological increase in fibre diameter variation. Occasional small elongated and angulated fibres were present. The atrophy/hypertrophy factors were 280/120 for type 1 and 200/360 for type 2 fibres, respectively. Five per cent of all fibres showed internal nuclei. Typical autophagic vacuoles in muscle fibres were rare. Very rarely, single necrotic muscle fibres could be seen. Endomysial and perivascular inflammatory cells were frequent (Fig. 5) and consisted of a mixed CD4/CD8 T-lymphocyte population and of macrophages. In single fibres undergoing necrosis, there was an increase of acid phosphatase activity. Histochemical fibre typing showed about 35% type 1 and 65% type 2 fibres, respectively, distributed in a typical checkerboard pattern. There was no neurogenic type grouping. Immunohistochemistry with a ubiquitin antibody gave positive reactions in muscle fibres with vacuoles undergoing degeneration. No immunoreactivity could be found with a polyclonal antibody against b-A4 amyloid.

Electron microscopy. Ultrastructural changes were less prominent when compared with those seen in the muscle of her sister. Autophagic vacuoles were located as described above. Intranuclear aggregates of filaments were frequent and identical to the ones described in case 1. Streaming of Z-bands was mild and occasionally seen. The mitochondrial population appeared normal.

Treatment

Despite the fact that her sister had obvious benefit from immunosuppressive treatment, the patient refused drug therapy for many years. Only recently was immunosuppressive therapy with prednisone (beginning with 100 mg daily) and azathioprine (100 mg daily) started. After 6 months of treatment, muscle strength of the deltoid, biceps and triceps muscles improved slightly, but nearly no change of muscle force was observed in leg muscles. Dysphagia nearly disappeared. Occasional choking was reported. The CK level fell to normal values (51 U/I).

The clinical presentation of the two sisters differs in some details from other previously reported familial cases of IBM, underscoring the heterogeneity of this muscle disease. Whereas in our patients both proximal and distal muscle groups were affected, a relative sparing of the quadriceps muscle was described by Massa et al. [19] and Sadeh et al. [23] as a characteristic sign in families of Iranian Jews. The same observation has been made by Hentati et al. [16] in a Tunisian kindred who additionally showed alterations of the cerebral white matter. A new syndrome consisting of familial m y o p a t h y with changes resembling I B M and periventricular leucoencephalopathy has also been described by Cole et al. [11]. There was no evidence of leucoencephalopathy on cranial CT in case 1.

Whereas in most familial cases of IBM the initial symptoms of the m y o p a t h y occur between the second and fourth decades [11,14,16,22], onset of weakness in our patients was later. The morphological findings in both cases conform to the m y o p a t h o l o g y of IBM. In a large series of patients with sporadic IBM [ 18], a triad of grouped atrophic fibres, inflammatory infiltrates and r i m m e d vacuoles was encountered in 88% of the patients; typical filaments could be demonstrated in 93% by electron microscopy. Some patients were considered to have I B M even in the absence of inflammatory infiltrates [15,18]. In most cases sporadic I B M can be differentiated from familial forms of I B M by the usual lack of inflammation [14,23], paucity of fibres containing phosphorylated tau protein [8] and paucity of Congo-red fibres in the latter [8]. In view of the marked inflammation our patients might have an unusual form of hereditary IBM.

In order to characterize I B M further, additional tests have been developed. Recently, use of congophilic green birefringent amyloid has been described in sporadic I B M [7,21], but also in familial I B M [20]. Moreover, as in our case 2, vacuolated myofibres have been found to be immunoreactive for ubiquitin [1,2,5]. Reactivity for b -a m yloid protein [3,4], amyloid precursor protein [24,27], A l z h e i m e r ' s neuronal Alz-50 antigen [6], and alpha-1 antichymotrypsin [9] have been described, but b -A 4 was negative in our case 2. Similar reactions to ubiquitin [2], a m y l o i d precursor protein, b -A 4 a m y l o i d and even cathepsins D and B were not only observed in muscle specimens of IBM, but also in those of oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy [27]. In other familial myopathies with r i m m e d vacuoles such as the "vacuolar myopathies" sparing the quadriceps [23] and autosomal-recessive distal m y o p a t h y with r i m m e d vacuoles [26], rare intranuclear aggregates of filaments have also been seen.

As a rule, for unknown reasons patients with sporadic and familial IBM do not respond to immunosuppressive treatment [18]. Occasionally, there may be transient yet mild improvement on high-dose corticosteroids (Dr. M. Dalakas, personal communication). Our patients experienced clear and longstanding benefit from immunosuppressive drugs and remained clinically stable during the follow-up periods of 24 months (case 1) and 6 months (case 2). Dysphagia improved significantly and more rapidly than weakness of limb muscles. The latter showed moderate improvement of muscle strength. Although transient and mild clinical improvement on steroids may also be observed as an unspecific effect in dystrophic myopathies, the longstanding benefit on azathioprine alone (case 1) argues strongly for the specific immunosuppres-sire effect in this case. Recently, successful treatment of some cases of IBM with high-dose intravenous immunoglobulins [25] has indicated that this mode of immunotherapy in IBM may be more promising than previously thought, although failure to improve has recently been noted in two patients so treated(K.V. Toyka and D. Pongratz, 1993, unpublished data). It remains unclear whether a response to immunosuppressive drugs is a characteristic feature of the hereditary form of IBM reported here, but its apparent benefit prompts us to recommend a trial with immunosuppressive treatment in otherwise typical cases of familial IBM.

Fig. l Case 1 .Fig. 313Fig. l Case 1. Muscle fibres of varying diameter, some with an angulated shape and some with rimmed or autophagic vacuoles (arrows); modified trichrome stain, x 345 Fig. 2a, b Case 1. Inflammatory infiltrates: a scattered across the muscle (arrows), haematoxylin and eosin, x 104; b between two muscle fibres, close to a capillary (arrow), x 4370 Fig. 3 Case 1. Electron micrograph of a muscle fibre nucleus containing densely packed filaments, • 12 425 Fig.4a, b Case 1. a Subsarcolemmal rimmed or autophagic vacuole filled with marginal myelin-like lamellae and a central aggregate of filaments (F), x 5803. b At higher magnification, the filamentous nature is evident (arrows), x 26 133

Table llMuscle strength before and after immunosuppressive treatment in cases 1 and 2. MRC 3-: almost sustained movement against gravity; MRC 3+: sustained movement against gravity and slight resistance to the examiner; MRC 5-: almost normal strength(CK creatine kinase)Case 1Case 2beforeafter abeforeafter btreatmenttreatmentDysphagiaMarkedNoneSevereMildDeltoid45-34Biceps343+4Triceps45-4+5-Hand extensors3444Quadriceps3+433+Anterior tibial2244Gastrocnemius3-444CK (U/l)530< 80380< 80a At 24 months b At 6 months; numbers indicate modified MRC grades

The deltoid and triceps muscles had almost normal power. Strength in other muscles increased mostly by one grade on the MRC scale (Table1). Her ability to climb stairs and lift weights improved. Almost no change of muscle strength occurred in the left anterior tibial muscle, probably owing to the advanced degeneration of the muscle.Methylpred-nisolone was tapered at 4-5 months; azathioprine medication hascontinued to date (2 years) with no relapse. Serum CK levels re-turned to normal values ranging from 40 to 80 U/1. A second EMGof deltoid and quadriceps muscles showed markedly less spontaneous activity than before treatment. Clinical course and CK levels remained stable in the follow-up period of 24 months.

