Apolipoprotein E alleles in sporadic inclusion-body myositis and hereditary inclusion-body myopathy

and Janis McFerrin, BS* In the recent issue of Annals, Garlepp and co-workers [I] reported increased frequency of apolipoprotein (apoE) 4 allele in sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM), based on studies performed in 14 Australian white patients [I]. In contrast, Harrington and associates [2] reported no increase of apoE 4 allele frequency in 11 s-IBM patients from the United Kingdom. ApoE is associated histopathologically with neurofibrillary tangles of Alzheimer's disease (AD) [ 3 ] .

An increased frequency of the apoE 4 allele has been demonstrated in both late-onset-familial and sporadic AD ([4], reviewed in reference 5). Because the muscle-fiber phenotype of s-IBM and hereditary inclusion-body myopathy (h-IBM) strikingly resembles that of AD brain, including abnormal accumulations of apoE [6], P-amyloid protein [7], hyperphosphorylated T [S], and other proteins (reviewed in reference 9 ) , it is important to establish whether an increased frequency of the apoE 4 allele is also associated with s-and/ or h-IBM.

We studied distribution of the apoE. alleles in 11 patients with s-IBM and 12 with h-IBM. s-1BM patients included 1 Pakistani, 2 Chinese, 1 Latino, and 7 white patients. Among h-IBM patients, 10 were Persian Jews and 1 was Pakistani. All s-and h-IBM patients had their diagnosis confirmed by our established diagnostic criteria IS]. The 35 disease-control patients included those with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, progressive muscular arrophy, myasthenia gravis, polymyositis, various peripheral' neuropathies, spastic paraparesis plus epilepsy, and morphologically nonspecific rnyopathies. DNA was extracted and apoE alleles studied :according to described methods [ 4 ] , without knowiedge of the patients' diagnoses.

There was no increased frequency ofapoE 4 allele in either s-or h-IBM (Table ). Our studies demonstrate that among our patients the frequency of the apoE 4 allele is not increased in either s-or h-IBM. Therefore, increased apoE 4 does not appear to be a risk factor for the IBMs.

The reason for the unusual similarity between pathology of TBM muscle and AD brain is not known, but a cascade 

Apolipoprotein E Alleles in Sporadic Inclusion-Body Myositis and Hereditary Inclusion-Body Myopathy

Reply

Michael J. Garlepp, PhD, and Frank L. Mastaglia, M D We note with interest the results presented by Askanas and colleagues in which they report that the incidence of the apolipoprotein E (apoE) ~4 allele in their patients with inclusion-body myositis (IBM) was not increased compared with controls. This study and the previous two published studies [ 1, 21, which have addressed this issue, have suffered from the obvious limitation that relatively few cases were available for analysis. This may be one reason for the discrepancy in reported results. However, other explanations are possible.

IBM may well be heterogeneous in its etiology, and the final manifestation as inclusion-body myopathy, with or without associated inflammation, may be reached via more 264 Copyright 0 1996 by the American Neurological Association 

ApoE= apolipoprotein E; s-IBM = sporadic inclusion-body myositis; h-IBM = hereditary inclusion-body myopathy.of similar pathogenic steps occurring in the muscle fiber and neuron, but provoked by different causes, is a possibility. A tissue-specific intracellular aging change could be a necessary requirement in both the IBMs and AD."USC Neuromziscular CenterDepartment of NeurologyUniversity of Southern California School of MedicineGood Samaritan HospitalLos Angeles, C4 90017-1912?Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular DiseaseUniversiq o f CaliforniaSan Francisco, CA 941 10$Division of NeurologyDuke University Medical CenterDurham, NC 2771 0AlleleMedianFrequenciesNumberAgePatientsof Alleles (yr)E2E3E4S-IBM22670.09 0.86 0.05h-IBM24380.08 0.87 0.05Disease control 70650.10 0.74 0.11

