Inclusion body myositis: Clinical and pathological boundaries

Inclusion body myositis, polymyositis, and dermatomyositis are three distinct categories of inflammatory myopathy. Some authorities commented on the selective early weakness of the volar forearm muscles, quadriceps, and ankle dorsiflexors in inclusion body myositis. The most important feature distinguishing inclusion body myositis from the other two inflammatory myopathies is the lack of responsiveness to immunosuppressive treatment. Although most patients with inclusion body myositis have characteristic muscle biopsy findings, some cannot be distinguished histologically early from polymyositis. Predicting responsiveness to immunosuppressive medications, independent of muscle histology, would be valuable to clinicians. We retrospectively reviewed the pattern of weakness and other clinical features of 46 patients newly diagnosed with either inclusion body myositis, polymyositis, or dermatomyositis. Asymmetrical muscle weakness with prominent wrist flexor, finger flexor, and knee extensor involvement was specific for inclusion body myositis and unresponsive polymyositis. Male sex, lower creatine kinase levels, slower rate of progression, and peripheral neuropathy were also more common in inclusion body myositis and unresponsive polymyositis than in responsive polymyositis and dermatomyositis patients. Repeat muscle biopsy in 2 patients in the unresponsive polymyositis group demonstrated histological features of inclusion body myositis. We suspect that patients with clinical features of inclusion body myositis but lacking histological confirmation may nonetheless have inclusion body myositis. Our study supports the recently proposed criteria for definite and possible inclusion body myositis.

the patterns of weakness between the various categories of inflammatory myopathies.

An important clinical feature distinguishing IBM from DM and PM is its lack of responsiveness to immunosuppressive medications. Although a few studies reported mild improvement in IBM with various immunomodulating agents [ 10-121, most studies failed to demonstrate significant objective and sustained improvement [l-3, 13, 141. In contrast, u p to 90% of DM and PM patients improve with immunosuppressive agents [12, 151. M a n y patients with so-called refractory PM eventually are diagnosed with IBM [I]. It would be valuable to clinicians if the pattern of muscle weakness o r other clinical features, independent of muscle histology, could help predict the response to immunosuppressive treatment. Clinicians could use this information in assessing prognosis and in guiding aggressiveness of immunosuppressive treatment.

We reviewed all patients with newly diagnosed inflammatory myopathy t o determine whether patterns of weakness or other clinical features were helpful in distinguishing IBM from PM a n d DM and i n predicting responsiveness to immunosuppressive therapy.

Materials and Methods

We retrospectively reviewed the clinical records of patients with a new diagnosis of DM, PM, or IBM in our neuromuscular clinics in San Antonio and Dallas between 1990 to 1994. Open biopsies were performed under local anesthesia in muscles that were Medical Research Council (MRC) grade 4 strength [16]. In the majority of patients, we performed biopsies of the biceps muscle; however, several patients had quadriceps biopsies. Two specimens, each at least 1.0 to 1.5 cm in length and 0.5 to 1.0 cm in diameter, were submitted for frozen section, while a third piece was biopsied on a clamp for EM. Twenty to thirty sections of each muscle biopsy specimen were analyzed for the presence of inflammatory infiltrate and rimmed vacuoles. Several sections of each specimen were stained with Congo red to look for amyloid deposition under polarized light and with fluorescence techniques [9, 171. In addition, four to seven plastic-embedded semithin (1-ym-thick) blocks were screened in both longitudinal and cross section for vacuoles. Thin sections (approximately 3 mm' X 70 nm) were cut from appropriate blocks (i.e., those with vacuoles). If vacuoles were not apparent on any of the semithin blocks, thin sections through one to four of the longitudinal blocks were obtained. Subsequently, the thin sections were scanned with EM for evidence of abnormal accumulation of tubulofilaments.

The diagnosis of D M was based clinically on the presence of the characteristic rash and histologically by the finding of perifascicular atrophy or inflammatory infiltrate that was predominantly perivascular and perifascicular and did not invade nonnecrotic fibers. I' M was diagnosed histologically by the presence of endomysial inflammatory infiltrate and invasion of nonnecrotic fibers. IBM was diagnosed histologically by the findings of (1) endomysial inflammatory infiltrate with invasion of nonnecrotic fibcrs, (2) one or more fibers with rimmed vacuoles per low-power field, and (3) either 15-to 18-nm nonbranching tubulofilamentous inclusions in the cytoplasm or nuclei on EM or evidence of amyloid deposition in muscle fibers after Congo red staining [3, 9, 171. Most of the patients were treated with immunosuppressive medications, although some of the IBM and PM patients declined treatment. Treatment was usually initiated with prednisone, 1.5 mg/kg/day (up to 100 mg/day), and was continued for 2 to 4 weeks before switching to alternate-day therapy (21. Patients were examined at 2 and 4 weeks following initiation of immunosuppressive therapy and then monthly for at least the first 6 months of treatment. When strength returned to normal or reached a plateau, prednisone was tapered by 5 mg every 2 to 3 weeks. If there was no improvement in muscle strength after 4 to 6 months of prednisone treatment, or if there was a relapse of weakness during prednisone taper, a second-line immunosuppressive agent, either azathioprine (2-3 mgikg of body weight every day) or methotrexate (up to 25 mg every week), was started. Several patients were also treated with cyclophosphamide and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG). Patients were considered completely responsive to immunosuppressive therapy if strength normalized, although we allowed for mild, fixed hip flexor weakness if patients were asymptomatic. We considered patients partially responsive if muscle strength improved by more than one MRC grade in at least two muscle groups, but did not completely return to normal. Subsequently, we categorized and statistically analyzed our inflammatory myopathy patients based on their initial diagnosis and response to therapy as follows: (1) IBM, (2) PM-unresponsive to immunosuppressive therapy, (3) PM-responsive to immunosuppressive therapy, and (4) DM.

We examined 36 muscle groups at the time of our initial evaluation (prior to us performing muscle biopsies and initiating immunosuppressive treatment) using a modified MRC (MMRC) scale [13, 17, 181. This method of manual muscle testing has had excellent interobserver and intraobserver reliability in our group of investigators and others [17).

For the purpose of the current analysis, we specifically addressed the MMRC scores of the finger flexors, wrist flexors, shoulder abductors, ankle dorsiflexors, knee extensors, and hip flexors. The lowest MMRC score of any of the finger flexors was used for analysis. We also assessed patients for asymmetry of strength (defined as a difference in MMRC and verified on at least two examinations) in two or more muscles, the presence of orbicularis oculi weakness, the presence of peripheral neuropathy clinically (requiring both the loss of sensation and diminished Achilles tendon reflex on examination) or by nerve conduction studies, ages at onset of symptoms and diagnosis, and serum creatine kinase level at the time of their initial evaluation. In addition, we categorized patients by their pattern of weakness by comparing the MMRC scores of finger and wrist flexors to those of the shoulder abductors in the upper extremities and the MMRC scores of the ankle dorsiflexors and knee extensors to those of the hip flexors in the lower extremities. Bilateral muscle groups were used for these regional comparisons.

We compared the means of continuous variables (ages at onset and diagnosis, serum creatine kinase level) between the inflammatory myopathy groups using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). Posthoc analyses were performed with Tukey's HSD test. We compared categorical variables (sex, pattern of weakness, and the presence of asymmetrical strength, facial weakness, and peripheral neuropathy) between inflammatory myopathy groups with x2 contingency tables. Fisher's exact test was used when appropriate. Because MMRC scores are ordinal measures, we used the Mann-Whitney U test to compare the median MMRC scores of the various muscles between the inflammatory myopathy groups. A p value < 0.05 was considered significant in all the statistical analyses performed.

Nerve conduction studies consisting of sural, median, and ulnar sensory nerve action potentials (SNAPS) and peroneal, posterior tibial, median, and ulnar compound muscle action potentials (CMAPs) were performed using previously described techniques [ 191. Concentric needle electromyography of selected muscles was also performed on most patients.

Results

We diagnosed 46 patients with inflammatory myopathy: 15 with IBM, 22 with PM, and 9 with DM. One of the IBM patients had an identical twin brother diagnosed elsewhere with IBM (the twin was not included in our study). Both twins had marked endomysial inflammation, rimmed vacuoles, and typical tubulofilaments as shown by EM, and should not be confused as having familial inclusion body myopathy. Four of the IBM patients previously had biopsies elsewhere and were referred to us as having refractory PM. However, our biopsies (the patients' second biopsies) demonstrated that these patients had IBM. We were able to review two of the initial biopsies of these patients, which were performed 2 and 3 years prior to our evaluation. Even in retrospect, we could not make the histological diagnosis of IBM based on those initial biopsy specimens because of the lack of rimmed vacuoles.

None of the 11 IBM patients whom we treated with immunosuppressive medications had subjective or objective improvement in strength.

Six of the DM patients responded completely, while 3 partially responded to immunosuppressive medications. Three of the 22 PM patients opted not to be treated. They were significantly older at the time of diagnosis (mean, 75 2 9 years) and they elected not to be treated with immunosuppressive agents after the possible risks were discussed. Of the 19 PM patients treated with immunosuppressive agents, 4 responded completely, 8 responded partially, and 7 had no response. The DM and responsive PM patients began improving 2 weeks to 4 months (mean, 1.75 months) after starting prednisone. Time to peak improvement ranged from 4 to 12 months (mean, 8 months).

The 7 unresponsive PM patients were treated with high-dose prednisone for at least 6 months. In addition, 2 were treated with azathioprine, 1 with methotrexate, and 2 with IVIG. Four of the unresponsive PM patients had repeat muscle biopsies. Specimens obtained by two of these repeat biopsies performed 6 months and 3 years after the initial biopsies were now consistent with IBM. However, specimens obtained by two biopsies performed 6 months and 7 years after the initial biopsies still did not demonstrate histological features characteristic of IBM. Although there was endomysial inflammation, the specimens still lacked rimmed vacuoles, abnormal accumulation of tubulofilaments as seen by EM, and amyloid deposition after Congo red staining.

When the MMRC scores for the various muscle groups were compared between the different categories of inflammatory myopathy, we observed rhat the MMRC scores for the finger flexors, wrist flexors, and ankle dorsiflexors were significantly lower in IBM patients compared to DM and PM patients (Table l). The MMRC scores for the quadriceps were lower in IBM than DM patients ( p < 0.05) and tended to be lower than the scores for PM patients, but this comparison did not reach statistical significance ( p = 0.063).

In addition, the patterns of weakness observed in individual patients within the various categories of inflammatory myopathies were distinct (Table 2). In the majority of IBM patients, the MMRC scores for the finger flexors and the wrist flexors were less than the MMRC scores for the shoulder abductors, and the MMRC scores for the knee extensors were lower than the MMRC scores for the hip flexors. In contrast, in the majority of PM and DM patients, MMRC scores for the shoulder abductors were less than the MMRC scores for the wrist and finger flexors, and the MMRC scores for the hip flexors were lower than the MMRC scores for the knee extensors and the ankle dorsiflexors.

Other clinical and laboratory features significantly different in IBM compared to PM and DM were asymmetrical muscle weakness, male sex, and lower creatine kinase level (see Table 1). Ages at onset and diagnosis were later in the IBM group than the DM group, but not significantly different from those in the PM group.

However, there was a trend for a later age at diagnosis in the IBM group when compared to the PM group.

Duration of symptoms prior to diagnosis was significantly longer in IBM and PM compared to DM. The duration of symptoms was longer in IBM compared to PM but this did not reach statistical significance.

When the PM patients were divided according to response to immunosuppressive therapy, the unresponsive group had MMRC scores and a pattern of weakness similar to IBM and significantly different from the responsive PM group (see Tables 1, 2). The MMRC scores and pattern of weakness of the responsive PM patients were similar to those of DM patients. No patient responding to immunosuppressive therapy had finger and wrist flexor MMRC scores less than shoulder abductor MMRC scores and knee extensor MMRC scores less than hip flexor MMRC scores (see Table 2). In contrast, 73% of IBM patients and 71% of pa- The lower serum creatine kinase levels and presence of asymmetrical muscle weakness in the unresponsive PM group were also similar to the findings in the IBM patients and statistically different from those in the responsive PM patients. Male gender was more common in IBM and unresponsive PM than in the responsive PM patients. Of note, the 3 patients in the PM group who deferred treatment with immunosuppressive agents also had MMRC scores and clinical features similar to the IBM and unresponsive PM patients.

Discussion

Our study provides the first detailed analysis of the difference in clinical features and patterns of weakness between the various categories of inflammatory myopathy. We demonstrated that finger flexors, wrist flexors, knee extensors, and ankle dorsiflexors are affected early in IBM in contrast to the more proximal weakness observed in DM and most PM patients. This peculiar pattern of weakness in IBM was noted previously [l-31 but our study provided comparative statistical data that document these clinical observations. Other clinical features (i.e., longer duration of illness) and laboratory features (ix., lower serum creatine kinase levels) were also associated with IBM. Our observations support the criteria for IBM recently proposed by Mendell and colleagues (see Table 1 

in [ZO]).

The pattern of muscle weakness and clinical and laboratory features of the unresponsive PM group were similar to those of the IBM group and clearly different from those of the responsive PM group. In the unresponsive PM group, 4 patients had repeat biopsy. Results of two of these repeat biopsies were supportive of IBM; however, specimens from the other two biopsies still did not meet histological criteria for IBM. There are two reasons why IBM may not be histologically confirmed in every patient. Vacuolated fibers and tubulofilament deposition (as noted by amyloid accumulation) increase with time in individual patients [14].

Patients who had a biopsy earlier in the course of their illness may not have developed sufficient histological features diagnostic of IBM. However, the ages at onset and at diagnosis and the durations of illness prior to diagnosis were not significantly different in our IBM patients compared to the unresponsive PM patients. The more likely explanation for the inability to confirm IBM may be secondary to the multifocal nature of the histological abnormalities, which could be missed on any given muscle biopsy specimen. Perhaps, screening more samples of muscle with EM and Congo red staining would have increased the yield of detecting tubulofilaments or amyloid in our unresponsive PM patients. Nevertheless, we would still not have been able to make the diagnosis of definite IBM in these patients given the lack of rimmed vacuoles.

We did not address the possible utility (or lack thereof) of electromyography (EMG) in differentiating IBM from PM and DM. When we performed the patients' EMGs, we were not blinded to the patients' histories and examinations. To determine whether EMG is helpful in differentiating the various categories of inflammatory myopathy, independent of the clinical features, the electromyographers would best be blinded to these features. Nevertheless, some authorities suggested that "neurogenic"-appearing motor units (i.e., large-amplitude and -duration units) on EMG support a diagnosis of IBM [21, 221. However, this EMG finding is not specific for neurogenic pathology or for IBM. In fact, Lotz and colleagues [3] found no significant difference in the frequency of mixed, large and small motor unit potentials in IBM compared to other inflammatory myopathies. However, they noted that the "fibrillation index" closely mirrored the distribution of weakness [3]. It is unclear whether similar increases of spontaneous activity were evident in the more severely affected muscles in DM and PM patients. Perhaps, EMG could be adjunctive to the clinical examination and demonstrate more severe spontaneous activity (i.e., fibrillation potentials) in the volar forearm muscles and the quadriceps in IBM patients and in the deltoid and iliopsoas muscles in DM and PM patients.

Our observations suggest that many unresponsive PM patients may actually have IBM, regardless of whether there is histological confirmation of IBM. The recently proposed criteria for IBM allow for a category of "possible IBM" when the diagnosis cannot be confirmed histologically, and our data support this concept [ZO]. Importantly, responsiveness to immunosuppressive therapy may be predicted by clinical features at the time of initial presentation. None of the patients who responded to immunosuppressive medications had MMRC scores for the finger or wrist flexors lower than those for the shoulder abductors and MMRC scores for the knee extensors lower than those for the hip flexors (see Table 2). Nor was there asymmetry of muscle strength in these responding patients (see Table 1). This pattern of weakness in a patient with inflarnmatory myopathy should suggest the diagnosis of IBM. If rhis clinical impression is not confirmed histologically, we would recommend a diagnosis of possible IBM. Patients with responsive inflammatory myopathies usually improve within 6 months after initiating immunosuppressive therapy, as demonstrated by o u r study and others [15]. While we still offer a 6-month trial of high-dose prednisone, we do not advocate more aggressive immunosuppressive therapy in patients with histologically confirmed or possible IBM, because they are unlikely to respond. Because our study is retrospective, our observations need to be confirmed in a prospective trial.

Table 1 .1Characteristics of Patients with Znflmmatory Myopatbies tients in the unresponsive PM group had this pattern of weakness. The incidence of peripheral neuropathy was higher in IBM and unresponsive PM patients compared to the responsive PM and DM patients. Peripheral neuropathy was diagnosed in 4 IBM patients. All 4 had loss of sensation in the distal part of the lower extremities, decreased or absent Achilles tendon reflexes, and low-amplitude SNAPS on nerve conduction studies. PM patients (3 unresponsive PM and 1 of the untreated PM patients). None were symptomatic. Three had loss of distal sensation and decreased Achilles tendon reflexes. All 4 had low-amplitude SNAPs.Initial DiagnosisPM Response to TherapyCharacteristicsDMPMIBMNo ResponseResponseNo. of patients922Demomaohics41 t 14"58 t 1641 2 14"55 5 140.07 i 0.08a3.6 5 4.531610112"5 (4 to 5)"5-(3 to 5)"5 (4 to 5IA5-(4 to 5)"4 (4 to 4)4 (2 to 5)5.-(4 to 5)5-(3-to 5IJ5 (5 to 5IZ4 (3-to 5 )4 (2 to 4)4 (2 to 5)Oi97115a1188/ 140194/185,758 2 6,9295,097 2 7,701;"

