Apolipoprotein E allele frequencies in sporadic inclusion body myositis

Inclusion body myositis (IBM) is a slowly progressive inflammatory myopathy, usually in late middle age, commoner in males than females. IBM is characterized histologically by the presence of rimmed vacuoles within muscle fibers and an endomysial inflammatory infiltrate of variable severity. Although generally sporadic, familial forms of IBM do oc-C U ~. ~" ~

The age of onset in these is usually earlier than in sporadic cases.

In both sporadic and familial IBM, electron microscopy reveals abnormal aggregates of 15-18-nm tubulofilamentous structures within the cytoplasm and nuclei of muscle fibers. The inclusions have some of the physical and chemical characteristics of amyloid in that they may stain with Congo red and display characteristic apple green birefringence under polarized light.17 Immunohistochemical studies have shown the inclusions to be associated with several of the proteins found in the amyloid deposits of Alzheimer's disease and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. These include P-amyloid precursor protein, P-amyloid protein, apolipoprotein E (apoE), ubiquitin, hyperphosphorylated tau, and prion p r ~t e i n , ~' ~' ' ~~~~ although it should be noted that not all of these findings have been confirmed by other investigat o r ~. ~~ Although the tubulofilamentous inclusions of IBM are intracellular, within rimmed vacuoles, and the apoE-immunoreactive amyloid deposits in Alzheimer's and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease are extracel-l ~l a r , ' ~~~' both tend to colocalize with lysosomal proteases such as au,-antichymotrypsin and cathepsins B

The apoE genotype is now well recognized to influence the risk of late onset familial and sporadic Alzheimer's disease,9,z5,z8229 possibly by enhancing the formation and deposition of amyloid fibrils in plaques and blood vessel^.^^,^^,^^ It may also influence the risk and time course of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, another disorder in which amyloid is deposited. In contrast to the earlier findings of Saunders et al.,25 Amouyel et al. found that €4 was a risk factor for Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and that the age at which death occurred was later in patients with €2.' Pickering-Brown et al. reported that €2 was associated with later onset of the disease." In view of the reported presence of apoE in the inclusions of IBM, and their amyloid characteristics and association with other Alzheimer's disease-and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease-related proteins, we have examined the relative frequency of the different apoE alleles in a large series of cases of IBM. and D.3,7,8,27,30 METHODS Patients. Biopsy material was available from 41 patients with sporadic IBM: 28 men and 13 women, ranging in age from 23 to 86 years (mean = 68, SD = 12). The duration of illness prior to biopsy varied from 6 months to over 20 years (mean = 5.5 years) and in 1 patient was described as "lifelong." All had had slowly progressive weakness, in most cases painless, although the distribution of weakness was variable.

In most patients the diagnosis on light microscopic examination of the biopsy was confirmed by demonstration of the characteristic 15-18-nm tubulofilamentous inclusions on electron microscopy. In 10 cases no material was available for electron microscopy, but these biopsies all contained multiple, typical, rimmed vacuoles and mild to moderate in-  1 also includes allele frequencies from two previous smaller studies; although the weighted average €4 allele frequency in IBM, calculated from the combined data, is slightly increased above that in the controls, the difference is not statistically significant (x2 = 5.61, df = 2, P = 0.06). The apoE allele frequencies in the present study did vary somewhat in relation to the degree of inflammation (data not shown) but the differences were not significant.

DISCUSSION

Several lines of evidence suggest that apoE is not merely associated with the amyloid deposits of Alzheimer's disease but may be involved in its formation. In familial and late-onset sporadic forms of Alzheimer's disease the frequency distribution of the three apoE isoforms, E2, E3, and E4 (encoded by the €2, €3, and €4 alleles), differs significantly from that in the general population; the frequency of E4 is Several stud-increased and of E2 decreased."*-'

ies have shown that in those who have Alzheimer's disease the €4 genotype is associated with increased vascular and parenchymal deposition of amy-Data vary as to the relative affinities of apoE3 and apoE4 for 6-amyloid peptide (AP) in ~i t r o , ' ~~~~ but most reports a g x e that apoE4 enhances the formation of amyloid fibrils from AP to a greater extent than does apoE3 (or, converscl!-, that apoE3 inhibits the formation of ainyloid more effectively than does apoE4) .622332s

As already noted, the inclusions of IBM share several structural, chemical, and immuno1ogic;il features with the ainyloid deposits of Alzheimer's disease. However, our results do not support a role for apoE in the genesis of IBM. Two recent smaller studies yielded conflicting data in this regard. Harrington et al. reported that the apoE €4 frequency was not increased in 11 patients with IBM.'* I n contrast, Garlepp et al. found a statistically significani increase in the €4 allele frequency (to 0.29) in 14 IBM patients." Our own findings reinforce those of Harrington et a1.'* Analysis of the combined data from all three studies shows the €4 allele frequency to be slightly increased over control values but not significantly so. It is worth noting that the amyloid deposits of Alzheimer's disease have been subjected to much more detailed biochemical analysis than have the inclusions of IBM. Characterization of the latter has been largely based on immunohistocheniical observations, in some cases contradictory. Sherrifl: et al. could not demonstrate P-amyloid protein, tau, apoE, or prion protein immunoreactivity in either frozen or paraffin sections of muscle from patients with IBM, despite the use of antigen retrieval techn i q u e ~. ~' 

Table 1 .1ADOE allele freauencies in IBM and controls: data from oresent and c)revious studiesApoEPresentHarrington et al."Garlepp et a1."Combined IBMControlsi3allel( n = 82)( n = 22)( n = 28)( n = 132)( n = 5008)€20.050.00.070.050.08€30.790.820.640.770.79€40.160.180.290.190.13flammation. In the cohort as a whole, the severity ofinflammation was semiquantitatively assessed as ab-sent in 6, mild in 21, moderate in 10, and severe in4 cases.ApoE Genotyping. The genotyping was performedeither on paraffin or cryostat sections. The methodwas as described previously.20221. Briefly, the paraffinsections were dewaxed, rehydrated, and digestedovernight at 37°C in proteinase K (50 pg/mL). Al-lele types were determined as described by Wenhamet al.," by "hot-start" polymerase chain reaction(PCR) amplification of the polymorphic fragment ofthe apoE gene and HhaI digestion of the PCR prod-ucts. The digested products were separated by poly-acrylamide gel electrophoresis.RESULTSThe frequencies of the €2, €3, and €4 alleles in the patients with IBM are shown in Table1. The figures fall well within the ranges reported in control populations-comparison with weighted average control frequencies of 0.077, 0.789, and 0.134, calculated by Harrington et al.,'? on the basis of data from several previous studies, yields values of x2 = 1.66, df = 2, P = 0.44. The apoE genotypes did not differ significantly with respect to the age of onset or duration of disease in the IBM patients. Table

