Immunopathogenesis of inflammatory myopathies

Immune-mediated mechanisms appear to play a primary role in the pathogenesis of polymyositis (PM) and dermatomyositis (DM). The serum of patients with active DM has high levels of circulating complement fragments C3b, C4b, and C5b-9 membranolytic attack complex (MAC) and demonstrates a very high C3 uptake in an vitro assay system. The MAC and the immune complex-specific C3bNEO fragment are deposited on the endomysial capillaries early in the disease and lead sequentially to loss of capillaries, muscle ischemia, muscle fiber necrosis, and perifascicular atrophy. In contrast, in PM the muscle fiber injury is initiated by sensitized CDS+ cytotoxic T cells that recognize heretofore unknown and probably endogenous muscle antigens in the context of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I expression. A restricted (oligoclonal) pattern of T-cell receptor with prominence of Val, Vb6, and Vb15 genes is noted within the endomysial infiltrates suggesting that the T-cell response is antigen driven. In both PM and DM, intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-l and vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM)-l are upregulated in the endomysial endothelial cells and function as ligands for the leukocyte integrins leukocyte function-associated antigen (LFA)-1 and very late activating antigen (VLA)-4, allowing activated lymphocytes to adhere to the endothelial cells and migrate to the muscle fibers. Among viruses, only the retroviruses human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and human T-cell lymphotropic virus (HTLV)-I have been convincingly shown to trigger PM, which is mediated by nonviral-specific, cytotoxic CD8+ cells. The treatment of inflammatory myopathies remains empirical. Many patients respond to steroids to some degree and for some period of time. Azathioprine, methotrexate, cyclosporine, cyclophosphamide, and plasmapheresis can be of mild to moderate benefit. High-dose intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) is a promising therapeutic modality for some patients resistant to therapies. In a controlled study, IVIg was effective in DM not only in improving the clinical symptoms but also in reversing the underlying immunopathology. The role of IVIg in PM and IBM is under study in control trials.

characteristic of DM. The cuticles may be irregular, thickened, and distorted, and the lateral and palmar areas of the fingers may become rough and cracked, with irregular "dirty" horizontal lines, resembling mechanic's hands El-9). DM in children resembles the adult disease, except for more frequent extramuscular manifestations, as discussed later. A common early abnormality in children may be a tiptoe gait due to flexion contracture of the ankles. When the weakness develops, it takes the form of a myopathy with proximal more than distal involvement. The degree of weakness can be mild, moderate, or severe leading to quadriparesis. At times, the muscle strength appears normal, hence the term "dermatomyositis sine myositis." When muscie biopsy specimens from such patients are examined, however, significant perivascular and perimysial inflammation is seen Cl21. DM usually occurs alone, but may overlap with systemic sclerosis and mixed connective tissue disease [I, 21. Fasciitis and skin changes similar to those found in DM have occurred in patients with the eosinophiliamyalgia syndrome associated with the ingestion of contaminated L-tryptophan [ 1, 2).

Polymyositis

In contrast with DM, PM has no unique clinical features and its diagnosis is one of exclusion. It is best defined as an inflammatory myopathy of subacute onset (weeks to months) and steady progression occurring in adults who do not have any of the following: rash, involvement of the eye and facial muscles, family history of neuromuscular disease, history of exposure to myotoxic drugs or toxins, endocrinopathy, neurogenic disease or dystrophy, and biochemical muscle disease or IBM, as determined by muscle enzyme histochemistry and biochemistry C1, 2, 7). Unlike in DM, in which the rash secures early recognition, the actual onset of PM cannot be easily determined, and the disease may exist for several months before the patient seeks medical advice.

PM can be viewed as a syndrome of diverse causes that may occur separately or in association with systemic autoimmune or connective tissue diseases and certain known viral or bacterial infections. Other than D-penicillamine and zidovudine (AZT), in which the myopathy has endomysial inflammation, myotoxic drugs such as emetine, chloroquine, steroids, cimetidine, ipecac, and lovostatin do not cause PM. Instead, they elicit a toxic noninflammatory myopathy that is histologically different from PM and does not require immunosuppressive therapy El, 2). Several animal parasites, such as protozoa (Toxopkzsma, Tvypanosoma), cestodes (cysticerci), and nematodes (trichinae), may produce a focal or diffuse inflammatory myopathy known as parasitic PM. A suppurative myositis, known as tropical PM or pyomyositis, may be produced by Stupbylococcus uureus, Yersiniu, Streptococcus, or other anaerobes. Pyomyositis, previously a rarity in the West, can now be seen in rare patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) [I). Certain bacteria, such as Borrelia burgdovferi of Lyme disease and IRgionella pneumopbilu of legionnaires' disease, may infrequently be the cause of PM 11,2).

Inclusion Body Myositzs

Although IBM is commonly suspected when a patient with presumed PM does not respond to therapy, involvement of distal muscles, especially foot extensors and deep finger flexors, in almost all the cases may be a clue to the early clinical diagnosis [l, 13,141.

The weakness and atrophy can be asymmetrical with selective involvement of the quadriceps, iliopsoas, triceps, biceps, and finger flexors in the forearm. Dysphagia is common and almost universal late in the disease. Because of the distal, and at times, asymmetrical weakness and atrophy and the early loss of the patellar reflex owing to severe weakness of the quadriceps muscle, a lower motor neuron disease is often suspected, especially when the serum creatine kinase (CK) concentration is not elevated. Sensory findings are generally normal except for a mildly diminished vibratory sensation at the ankles, presumably related to the patient's age. Contrary to early suggestions, the distal weakness does not represent neurogenic involvement but is part of the distal myopathic process. In contrast to PM and DM in which facial muscles are spared, in our series mild facial muscle weakness occured in 60% of IBM patients. The diagnosis is always made by the characteristic findings in muscle biopsy specimens, as discussed later. Patients with IBM account for the majority of the patients more than 50 years old referred to NIH for "polymyositis unresponsive to therapy."

IBM can be associated with systemic autoimmune or connective tissue diseases in up to 20% of patients. Familial disease, some members with an associated leukoencephalopathy and others with sparing of the quadriceps, may be found. Among 90 patients seen at the Neuromuscular Diseases section of NINDS over the last 4 years, 9 (10%) had familial IBM. Their inheritance was recessive in 8 families and dominant in 1.

Progression of IBM is slow but steady. The degree of disability in relation to the duration of the disease has not been studied. Review of the course of 14 randomly chosen patients with symptoms for more than 5 years revealed that 10 of them required a cane or support for ambulation by the fifth year after onset of disease while 3 of 5 patients with symptoms for 10 years or more were using wheelchairs for ambulation c 147.

Extramuscular Manifestations

In addition to the primary disturbance of the skeletal muscles, extramuscular manifestations may be prominent in patients with inflammatory myopathies. These include the following. some patients may be normal even from the beginning of the illness. CK concentration may also be normal in patients with untreated, even active, childhood DM and in some patients with PM or DM associated with a connective tissue disease, reflecting the concentration 1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

-Dysphagia, most prominent in IBM, due to involvement of the oropharyngeal striated muscles and distal esophagus. Cardiac abnormalities consisting of atrioventricular conduction defects, tachyarrhythmias, low ejection fraction, and dilated cardiomyopathy either from the disease itself or from hypertension associated with long-term steroid use. Pulmonary involvement, as the result of primary weakness of the thoracic muscles, drug-induced pneumonitis (e.g., from methotrexate), or interstitial lung disease. Interstitial lung disease may precede the myopathy or occur early in the disease and develops in up to 10% of patients with PM or DM, the majority of whom have anti-Jo-1 antibodies. Subcutaneous calcifications, sometimes extruding on the skin and causing ulcerations and infections, found in patients with DM, especially children. Gastrointestinal ulcerations seen more often in childhood DM, due to vasculitis and infection. Contractures of the joints especially in childhood DM. General systemic disturbances, such as fever, malaise, weight loss, arthralgia, and Raynaud's phenomenon, when the inflammatory myopathy is associated with a connective tissue disorder. An increased incidence of malignancies in patients with DM, but not PM or IBM. Because tumors are usually uncovered not by a radiological blind search, but by abnormal findings on medical history and physical examination, a complete annual physical examination, with pelvic and rectal examinations, urinalysis, complete blood cell count, blood chemistry tests, and a chest x-ray film, is recommended 11, 27.

Diagnosis

The clinically suspected diagnosis of PM, DM, or IBM is established or confirmed by examining the serum muscle enzyme concentrations, the electromyographic findings, and the muscle biopsy specimens.

Serum Muscle Enzymes

The most sensitive enzyme is CK, which in the presence of active disease can be elevated as much as 50 times the normal level. Although CK concentration usually parallels the disease activity, it can be normal in active DM and rarely even in active PM. In IBM, CK is not usually elevated more than tenfold, and in of the pathological process in the intramuscular vessels and the perimysium. Along with the CK, the serum glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT), glutamate pyruvate transaminase (SGFT), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and aldolase levels may be elevated.

E Iectmmy ography

Needle electromyography shows myopathic potentials characterized by short-duration, low-amplitude polyphasic units on voluntary activation, and increased spontaneous activity with fibrillations, complex repetitive discharges, and positive sharp waves. This electromyographic pattern occurs in a variety of acute, toxic, and active myopathic processes and it is not specific or diagnostic for the inflammatory myopathies. Mixed myopathic m d neurogenic potentials (polyphasic units of short and long duration) are more often seen in IBM but they can be seen in both PM and DM especially late in the disease. Electtomyographic studies are generally useful for excluding neurogenic disorders and confirming either active or inactive myopathy.

M uscle Biopsy

Although the presence of inflammation is the histological hallmark for these diseases, there are additional unique histological features characteristic for each group.

In DM the endomysial inflammation is predominantly perivascularly or in the interfascicular septae and around rather than within the fascicles. The intramuscular blood vessels show endothelial hyperplasia with tubuloreticular profiles, fibrin thrombi, especially in children, and obliteration of capillaries {1-51. The muscle fibers undergo necrosis, degeneration, and phagocytosis, often in groups involving a portion of a muscle fasciculus in a wedge-like shape, or at the periphery of the fascicle due to microinfarcts within the muscle. This results in perifascicular atrophy, characterized by two to ten layers of atrophic fibers at the periphery of the fascicles. The presence of perifascicular atrophy is diagnostic of DM, even in the absence of inflammation.

In PM there is no perifascicular atrophy and the blood vessels are normal. The endomysial infiltrates are mostly within the fascicles (endomysially) surrounding individual, healthy muscle fibers, resulting in phagocytosis and necrosis. When the disease is chronic, the connective tissue is increased.

The histological hallmarks of IBM are as follows.

1. Basophilic granular inclusions distributed around the edge of slitlike vacuoles (rimmed vacuoles). 2. Angulated or round fibers often in small groups.

Eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusions.

4. Sparse to prominent endomysial inflammation in a pattern identical to that seen in PM.

Tiny deposits of Congo red-or crystal violet-

positive amyloid within or next to some vacuoles. The amyloid, seen in up to 75% of our patients, immunoreacts with P-amyloid protein, the type of amyloid sequenced from the amyloid fibrils of blood vessels of patients with Alzheimer's disease 6. Characteristic filamentous inclusions seen by electron microscopy in the cytoplasm or myonuclei, prominent in the vicinity of the rimmed vacuoles. Although demonstration of the filaments by electron microscopy was initially essential for the diagnosis of IBM, we do not believe that this is now necessary if all the characteristic clinical and light microscopic features are fulfilled. Further, such filaments are not unique to IBM; they can be seen in other vacuolar myopathies. The vacuolated muscle fibers contain strong ubiquitin immunoreactivity lo- calized to the cytoplasmic tubulofilaments { 1 >}.

[ 1 5-181.

Immune-Mediated Mechanisms

Presence of Autoantibodies

Various autoantibodies against nuclear (antinuclear antibodies) and cytoplasmic antigens are found in up to 20% of patients with inflammatory myopathies {1-3, 9, 191. The antibodies to cytoplasmic antigens are directed against cytoplasmic ribonucleoproteins which are involved in translation and protein synthesis. They include antibodies against various synthetases, translation factors, and proteins of the signal-recognition particles. The antibody directed against the histadyltransfer RNA synthetase, called anti-Jo-1, accounts for 75% of all the antisynthetases and it is clinically useful because up to 80% of PM or DM patients with anti-Jo-1 antibodies have interstitial lung disease. In general, these antibodies may be non-muscle-specific because (1) they are directed against ubiquitous targets and may represent epiphenomena of no pathogenic significance, (2) they occur in all three subtypes (PM, DM, and IBM), in spite of their clinical and immunopathological differences, and (3) they are almost always associated with interstitial lung disease. Because at times they can occur in patients with interstitial lung disease who do not have active myositis, they could be as specific markers for the interstitial lung disease as they are for the myopathy. Patients with the overlap syndrome of DMlsystemic sclerosis may have a specific antinuclear autoantibody, the anti-PM/Scl, directed against a nucleolar protein complex.

Immunopathology of Dernaatomyositis

The primary antigenic targets in DM are components of the vascular endothelium of the endomysial blood vessels and the capillaries. Signs of an ongoing angiopathy in DM were first shown by Banker on the basis of light and electron microscopic observations [20, 2 13. Engel and colleagues {22} showed that the earliest pathological alterations in DM are changes in the endothelial cells consisting of pale and swollen cytoplasm with microvacuoles. Carpenter and k p a t i and colleagues 1.231 confirmed and expanded on these findings by demonstrating active focal destruction of capillaries consisting of undulating tubules in the smooth endoplasmic reticulum of the endothelial cells, along with obliteration, vascular necrosis, and thrombi.

The first signs that such alterations in the microvasculature were caused by an immune-mediated process were demonstrated by Whitaker and Engel who immunolocalized immune complexes in the endomysial blood vessels {24}. Subsequently, Kissel and coworkers [25] showed that the microvascular injury was mediated by the C5 b-9 membranolytic attack complex (MAC), the lytic component of the complement pathway. Emslie-Smith and Engel 1263, using a double immunolocalization method of a lectin Ulex europaeus as a specific endothelial marker and antibodies to MAC, confirmed that MAC is deposited on capillaries and that these deposits occur early in the disease and precede signs of inflammation or structural changes in the muscle fibers. We confirmed these observations using the double immunocytochemistry technique 1.1, 21, and investigated further the role of the complement {27}. Utilizing an in vitro assay system, we found that the C3 uptake is very high in the serum of patients with active DM. Further, MAC and the active fragments of the early complement components C3b and C4b can be detected in the serum and appear to correlate with disease activity. In addition, the neoantigen C3bNE0, which is immune complex-specific because it gets exposed when the C3b is incorporated into an immune complex, is deposited on the muscle capillaries along with the MAC {27}.

Sequentially, the disease begins when antibodies in the circulation activate complement C3, forming C3b and C4b fragments that lead to formation of C3bNEO and MAC, both of which are deposited in the endomysial microvasculature (Fig 1    In the perifascicular areas, the infiltrates are mostly CD8' cells and macrophages and invade major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I antigenexpressing muscle fibers, a sign of a coexisting T cellmediated and MHC class I-restricted cytotoxic process. The latter appears to be also of pathogenetic significance because after successful therapy, repeat bi-

Fig 1. Endomysial vessels on a transverse section of afreshfrozen muscle biopsy specimen from a patient with dematomyositis. The section was immunostained with both antibodies to the C5 b-9 membranolytic attack complex (MAC), which highlights the complement deposits with a green juorescence (top), and with Ulex europaeus and avidin-rhodamine, which highlights the endothelial cells of the endomysial oessels with a redJu0re.rcence (middle). The doubIe exposure of (top) and (middle) produces a yellow color from the superimposition of the redfluorescence on the capillay walls and the green jluorescence from the MAC deposits (bottom). The presence of MAC deposits on the capillaries implies inju y mediated by complement-jxing antibodies. Note that in at least three small blood vessels the MAC has induced severe destruction of the endothelial cell wall that becomes almost unstainable with

Fig 3. Sequence of immunopathological changes in dermatomyositis beginning with activation of complenzent and formation of C3 through the classic or alternative pathway by antibodies (y) against endothelial cells. Activated C3 leads to formation of C3b, C3bNE0, and membranolytic attack complex (MAC) which traverse across the endothelial cell wall to the endomysial capillaries (A). Deposition of MAC leads to destruction and reduced number of capillaries, with ischemia or microinfarcts most prominent in the periphety of the fascicle (B). Finally, a smalhr than normal number of capillaries with a dilated diameter re- main and perifascicular atrophy ensues (C). Not only the complement-jxing antibodies (Y) but also 8 cell5, CD8+ T cells, and macrophages (MO) traffic to the muscle. The migration of cells from the circulation is facilitated by the vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM) and intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM) whose expression on the endothelial cells is upregulated by the released cytokines. T cells and macrophages through their integrins vevy late activation antigen (VLA)-4, leukocyte functionassociated antigen (LFA)-I, and

Mac-1 bind to the VCAM and ICAM and traffic to the muscle through the endothelial cell wall.

opsy fails to demonstrate such abnormalities, as described later.

The sequence of events leading to injury in DM is diagrammatically summarized in Figure 3.

Immunopathology Polymyositis

In PM and IBM, there is evidence not of microangiopathy and muscle ischemia, as in DM, but of an antigen-directed cytotoxicity mediated by cytotoxic T cells f4, 11, 31, 32). This conclusion is supported by the presence of CD8' cells (Fig 4A ), which along with macrophages initially surround healthy, but MHC class I-expressing, nonnecrotic muscle fibers (Fig 4B ) that eventually invade and destroy.

Quantification of the endomysial infiltrates demonstrates that the majority consist of CD8' cells followed by macrophages and CD4+ cells 14, 11, 31-34}. The distribution of cells with the phenotypic markers noted above are proportionally equal in PM and IBM and identical in PM associated with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and human T-cell lymphotropic virus (HTLV)-I infection [33, 341. These cells are activated as evidenced by their expression of MHC class I and I1 antigens and ICAM-1 (Figs 4B , 4C). ICAM-1 is strongly induced on the surfaces of nonnecrotic muscle fibers where they are invaded by autoaggressive cells, and strongly serves as an important ligand for these cells 13 51. Further, there is convincing evidence that the endomysial CD8' cells are cytotoxic because of 1.

2.

3.

the following.

Cell lines established from muscle biopsy specimens from PM patients exert cytotoxicity to their autologous myotubes in vitro [36].

By immunoelectron microscopy, CD8+ cells and macrophages send spike-like processes into nonnecrotic muscle fibers, which traverse the basal lamina and focally displace or compress the muscle fibers {37}. This can be also seen by light microscopy in our immunocytochemical preparations where the trafficking of the CD8+ cells toward the muscle membrane can be traced and CD8+ spikes penetrating the plasmalemma can be visualized (Fig 5).

The macrophages have cytotoxic rather than phagocytic properties because they contain only a few heterophagic vacuoles {4, 371 and they are activated expressing complement and Fc receptors for IgG Some of the cytotoxic CD8' T cells express cytotoxic granules containing perforin that mediate muscle fiber destruction f391.

y/6 T cells, another subset of cytotoxic T cells, mediated the cytotoxicity in 1 patient with PM and probably recognized heat shock protein expressed intensely on the surface or the interior of nonnecrotic muscle fibers [40}. ' with polymyositis immunostained for antibodies to CD8 (A),

MHC cla~s I antigen (l?), and intercellular adhesion molecule (1CAM)-1 (C). Note upregulation of MHC class I both on the infiltrating endomysial cells and on the sarcolemma even in the muscle fibers not surrounded by cells (B). The endothelial cells of the vein and the lymphoid infiltrates are also ICAM-1 positive (C). The activated, ICAM-1 -positive cells traffic through the wall of the vessel, where ICAM-I expression is upregulated, to invade muscle fibers (C) .

Fig

. Cross sections of nonnecrotic muscle fibers from a patient with polymyositis immunostained with antibodies to CD8' cells. Sequentially, the CD8+ cells are directed to the muscle fiber (A), surround the fiber (B), and invade the plasmalemma via the CD8+, spike-like projections (C).

mediated cytotoxicity is MHC class I antigen restricted, the antigenic peptides bound by the MHC class I for presentation to the CD8' cells are unknown. Such antigens could be either endogenous sarcolemmal or cytoplasmic self-proteins synthesized within the muscle fiber, or endogenous viral peptides 14, 1 11. Because polymerase chain reaction (PCR) has failed to amplify viruses within the muscle fibers not only in patients with a putative viral infection 142,431 but also in patients with classic PM associated with HIV-1 or HTLV-I infection (as discussed later), it is highly unlikely that this antigen represents peptides from any of the examined viruses. A diagram demonstrating the events leading to PM is shown in Figure 6.

On the basis of PCR analysis of the infiltrating lymphocytes, there is restricted (oligoclonal patterns) of T-cell receptor (TCR) V a and V p gene family expression with prominence of V a l , Vpl5, and V p 6 gene families within the endomysial infiltrates 144,451. This suggests that in PM the T-cell response is antigen driven and may play a role in mediating the muscle fiber invasion.

Role of Superantigens

Superantigens (exogenous or endogenous) consist of a group of bacterial toxins (streptococcal M proteins, enterotoxins) or retroviruses that attach to MHC class I1 molecules and interact with the V p segment of the TCR. They can stimulate a large number of anergic T cells that express the TCR V p chains and lead to a vigorous expansion of T-cell clones. Because the TCR of the endomysial infiltrates of patients with inclusion body myositis expresses a high frequency of V p gene families 1451, superantigens may play a role in triggering the inflammatory response in this disease. The very brisk endomysial inflammation seen in IBM, the selective expansion of V p cell clones, and the seeming resistance of the disease to immunotherapies support the possibility that the T-cell response may be driven by superantigens.

Fig 6. Sequence of events leading to polymyositis. The activated CD8+ cells and macrophages through their integrins and counterreceptors expressed on the endothelial cells (shown in Fig 3) traffic to the muscle. The CD8' cells recognize on the muscle membrane unknown antigen presented in the context of MHC class I expression. Cytokines released in the circulation (possibly by viral infictions) facilitate cellular extravasation and upregulation of MHC class I by the muscle fiber. Lymphokines, interleukin-1, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a, and interferon (IFNJy secreted by the activated T cells and macrophages enhance the myocytotoxicity and upregulate further the MHC class I expression. Rarely, $8 T cells that recognize heat shock protein can be the myocytotoxic cells. Macrophages are also activated expressing Fc receptors for IgG and complement and attach to the muscle fiber (via their Fc receptors) probably exerting a direct cytotoxic effect.

Association with Viral Infections

The following viruses have been associated directly or indirectly with the cause of inflammatory myopathies.

COXSACKIEVIRUSES.

These viruses can cause chronic and acute myositis with convincing histological features in mice inoculated with various coxsackievirus strains 146-48). Muscle cultures, especially immature myotubes, also can be infected with coxsackieviruses. In humans, the role of coxsackieviruses in the cause of PM has been indirect and, up to now, unconvincing 146, 471. A possible molecular mimicry phenomenon was proposed because of structural homology between the Jo-1, a histadyl-transfer RNA synthetase mentioned earlier, and the genomic RNA of an animal picorna-virus, the encephalomyocarditis virus. This association was strengthened when enteroviral RNA was reportedly found by in situ hybridization within the muscle fibers of specimens from patients with myositis [49].

Our very sensitive PCR studies, however, repeatedly failed to confirm in different patients the presence of enteroviruses in these patients' muscle biopsy specimens 142, 43). It is unlikely therefore, although not impossible, that replication of enterovirus takes place within the muscles of patients with chronic inflammatory myopathies.

INFLUENZA VIRUS.

These orthomyxoviruses have been connected with inflammatory myopathy because of reports that myalgia, CK elevation, or rhabdomyolysis can follow infection with influenza [48]. In two cases, viral particles were seen in the muscle biopsy specimens by electron microscopy 148). Further, the influenza B/Lee strain can infect the human rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines. Apart from these observations, however, there has not been any clear evidence connecting these viruses with the cause of sporadic PM in humans.

OTHER VIRUSES. Paramyxoviruses (mumps) were initially implicated in the cause of IBM because the 15to 20-nm microtubular filaments in IBM resembled viral nucleocapsids 150). Search for mumps virus by PCR at two different laboratories, however, was unyielding t42, 5 1). Genome from other viruses has been also searched for by PCR in the muscles of patients with inflammatory myopathies. Specifically, we did not find encephalomyocarditis virus, adenovirus, HIV, HTLV-I, or HTLV-I1 in the RNA extracted from muscle biopsy specimens of 44 patients studied [42].

FQSTVIRAL MYOSITIS. This rare condition occurs in children or adults [46][47][48]. It is characterized by an acute onset of mild to severe muscle weakness with or without myoglobinuria and elevated CK that follows a viral infection. Although patients with mild weakness may recover spontaneously or respond to immunosuppressive drugs, patients with severe weakness oftentimes respond poorly, or they are left with incapacitating permanent disability. The viruses responsible for these cases are unknown and no indirect or direct association with any infectious agent has been identified. Further, no virus has been isolated from these patients' muscle and the immunopathology triggered by the responsible agent has not been characterized.

RETROVIRUSES.

The first evidence that retroviruses can be associated with inflammyory myopathy was in monkeys infected with the simian immunodeficiency virus [52,53). Almost the same year the first cases of HIVassociated myositis were reported [54}. About 3 years later, the association of HTLV-I with myositis became apparent 155). Further, transgenic mice for human foamy retroviruses developed a myopathy with the viral genome detectable in the muscle {56]. Because PM occurs during an infection with at least four different retroviruses, it appears that retroviruses are, at the moment, the most reasonable candidate viruses to search in connection with the cause of PM, DM, and IBM.

In HIV-positive patients, an inflammatory myopathy (HIV-PM) can occur either as an isolated clinical phenomenon, being the first clinical indication of HIV infection, or concurrently with other manifestations of the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) 154, 57-60). HIV seroconversion can also coincide with myoglobulinuria and acute myalgia, suggesting that the virus may trigger muscle fiber destruction early in the infection.

HTLV-I causes not only a myeloneuropathy-referred to as tropical spastic paraparesis (TSP)-but also PM, which may coexist with TSP or may be the only clinical manifestation of HTLV-I infection [55, Using in situ hybridization, PCR, immunocytochemistry, and electron microscopy, we could not detect viral antigens within the muscle fibers of patients with HIV-PM or HTLV-I PM but only in occasional endomysial macrophages 133-35, 58-60). These observations led us to conclude that in HIV-PM and HTLV-I PM there is no evidence of persistent infection of the muscle fiber with the virus and that viral replication does not take place within the human muscle. The predominant endomysial cells in HIV-PM and HTLV-I PM are CD8+, non-viral-specific, cytotoxic T cells which along with macrophages invade or surround MHC class I antigen-expressing nonnecrotic muscle fibers. Because this pattern is similar to the one described earlier for retroviral-negative PM, we proposed that a T cell-mediated and MHC class I-restricted cytotoxic process is a common pathogenetic mechanism in both PM, HIV-PM, and HTLV-I PM. The various cytokines or toxic lymphokines released by the retroviral-infected endomysial inflammatory cells may contribute to the development of PM by altering the antigenic expression of normal muscle fibers generating a secondary autoimmune response (see Fig 6).

58-61].

Treatment The evidence just described-that immunopathological mechanisms are primarily involved in PM, DM, and IBM-justifies the need for treating these diseases with immunosuppressive therapies. Most of the treatment trials, however, have been empirical and largescale control therapeutic studies against the immunologically specific forms of childhood DM, adult PM, or adult DM have not been conducted [1][2][3][62][63][64][65][66]. As the specific target antigens are also unknown, these S82 Annals of Neurology Supplement 1 to Volume 37, 1995  therapies are not selectively targeting the autoreactive T cells or the complement-mediated process on the intramuscular blood vessels, but instead they are inducing a nonselective immunosuppression or immunomodulation.

The goal of therapy in PM, DM, and IBM is to improve the function in activities of daily living as the result of improvement in muscle strength. Although when the strength improves, the serum CK falls concurrently, the reverse is not always true because most of the immunosuppressive therapies can result in a decrease of serum muscle enzymes without necessarily improving muscle strength. Unfortunately, this has been misinterpreted as "chemical improvement," and has formed the basis for the common habit of "chasing" or "treating" the CK level instead of muscle weakness, a practice that has led to a prolonged use of unnecessary immunosuppressive drugs and erroneous assessment of their efficacy. The prudence of discontinuing these drugs after an adequate trial only led to a reduction in CK and not to objective improvement in muscle strength as has been repeatedly discussed El-3, 62-66].

Immunotherapeutic Drugs and Procedures

Corticosteroids Prednisone is the first-in-line drug of this empirical treatment. Its action is unclear but it may exert a beneficial effect by inhibiting recruitment and migration of lymphocytes to the areas of muscle inflammation and interfering with the production of lymphokines. Its effect on the lymphokine interleukin (1L)-1 may be important because IL-1 is myotoxic E671 and is secreted by the activated macrophages that invade the muscle fibers (see Fig 6). Steroid-induced suppression of ICAM-1 may also be relevant because downregulation of ICAM-1 can prevent the trafficking of lymphocytes across the endothelial cell wall toward the muscle fibers

Because the effectiveness and relative safety of prednisone therapy will determine the future need for stronger immunosuppressive drugs, I prefer an aggressive approach of high-dose prednisone since early in the disease. A high dose of 80 to 100 mg/day as a single daily morning dose for an initial period of 3 to 4 weeks is preferable. Prednisone is then tapered over a 10-week period to 80 to 100 mg as a single daily, alternate-day dose by gradually reducing an alternate "off day" dose by 10 mg/week, or faster if necessitated by side effects, though this carries a greater risk of breakthrough of disease. If there is evidence of efficacy, and there are no serious side effects, the dosage is reduced gradually by 5 to 10 mg every 3 to 4 weeks until the lowest possible dose that controls the disease is reached. If by the time the dosage has been reduced to 80 to 100 mg every other day (approximately 14 weeks after initiating therapy), there is no objective benefit (defined as increased muscle strength and not as lowering of the CK or a subjective feeling of increased energy), the patient may be considered unresponsive to prednisone and tapering is accelerated while the next-in-line immunosuppressive drug is started 162-66'1.

The merits of a single-dose, alternate-day program in minimizing side effects (cushingoid appearance, diabetes, obesity, high blood pressure, osteoporosis, avascular necrosis of the hip, retarded growth in children) while adequately controlling the underlying disease have been previously discussed El, 3, 62-66]. The most common side effects seen in patients with PM or DM treated for long periods with corticosteroids have been extensively discussed elsewhere 1641. Among the interaction of prednisone with other drugs, it is worth remembering that anticonvulsants such as phenobarbital, carbamazepine, and phenytoin, which are inducers of the hepatic microsomal enzyme system, may alter the extent of prednisolone metabolism, accelerating the elimination of prednisone and methylprednisolone 1681. Somewhat higher than anticipated steroid doses may therefore be required to achieve therapeutic response in such patients.

Prednisone Faiiures and Nonsteroidd Immunosuppressive Therapies

Although it is my view that almost all the patients with bona fide PM or DM respond to steroids to some degree and for some period of time, a number of them fail to respond or become steroid resistant. The decision to start an immunosuppressive drug in PM or DM patients is based on the following factors, as discussed before E62-661: (1) There is a need for its "steroidsparing" effect, when in spite of steroid responsiveness the patient has developed significant complications;

(2) attempts to lower a high steroid dosage repeatedly resulted in a new relapse; (3) an adequate dose of prednisone for at least a 2to 3-month period has been ineffective; and (4) disease is progressing rapidly with evolving severe weakness and respiratory failure. The preference for selecting the next-in-line immunosuppressive therapy is, however, empirical. The choice is usually based on each physician's prejudices, personal experience with each drug, and assessment of the relative efficacy-safety ratio. The following therapies are used in the treatment of patients with PM, DM, or IBM.

Azatbioprine, a derivative of 6-mercaptopurine, is given orally. Although lower doses (1.5-2.0 mg/kg) are commonly used, I prefer higher doses up to 3 mg/ kg for effective immunosuppression. This drug is well tolerated, has fewer side effects, and empirically appears to be as effective for long-term therapy as the other drugs. Because azathioprine is usually effective Dalakas: Immune Mechanisms in Polymyositis and Dermatomyositis S83 given concurrently with allopurinol, can be severely toxic to the liver or bone marrow and their combined use is not recommended.

Methotrexate, an antagonist of folate metabolism, is frequently used in spite of often-disappointing results. In our experience, methotrexate either has been ineffective or has shown only marginal benefit. It can be given intravenously over 20 to 60 minutes at weekly doses of 0.4 mg/kg up to 0.8 mg/kg with sufficient fluids, or orally starting at 7.5 mg weekly for the first 3 weeks (given in a total of three doses, 2.5 mg every 12 hours), increasing it gradually by 2.5 mg/week up to a total of 25 mg weekly. A relevant side effect is methotrexate pneumonitis which can be difficult to distinguish from the interstitial lung disease of the primary myopathy, often associated with Jo-1 antibodies, as described above.

Cyclophosphamide, an alkylating agent, is given intravenously or orally, at doses of 2.0 to 2.5 mg/kg, usually 50 mg orally 3 timedday. Cyclophosphamide has been ineffective in our hands 1691 in spite of occasional promising results reported by others [70]. The drug may be helpful, however, in a subset of patients who have interstitial lung disease.

Chlorambucil, an antimetabolite, has been tried in some patients, with variable results. Recently, this drug was found to be safe and effective in 5 patients with DM, to the point that prednisone was reduced or discontinued [7 11.

Cyclosporine has been used with limited success. Although the toxicity of the drug can now be monitored by measuring optimal trough serum levels (which vary between 100-250 nglml), its effectiveness in PM and DM is uncertain. A report that low doses of cyclosporine could be of benefit in children with DM needs confirmation [72). Based on the patients referred to us, the drug has been disappointing. Recently, cyclosporine was tried as a first-line therapy in DM patients, with promising results {73]. The advantage of cyclosporine is that it acts faster than azathioprine and the results (positive or negative) may be apparent early.

Plasmapheresis was not helpful in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study [74]. However, occasional patients with active disease, especially DM, can improve if plasmapheresis is combined with immunosuppressive drugs.

Total body ivadiation is an extreme remedy that can be considered for extreme situations. It has been helpful in 2 of our patients and appears to have long-lasting benefit C751. The long-term side effects of this treatment, however, should be seriously considered before deciding on this experimental approach. Total body irradiation has been ineffective in IBM 1763.

Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVlg), taken from human serum pools, is a promising, but very expensive therapy. Uncontrolled studies found IVIg to be effective [77-791. The first double-blind study that we conducted for DM demonstrated that IVIg is a very effective therapy in patients with refractory DM. Not only the strength improved but also the underlying immunopathology resolved [SO]. The improvement begins after the first IVIg infusion but it is clearly evident by the second monthly infusion. The benefit is short-lived (not more than 8 weeks), requiring repeated infusions every 6 to 8 weeks to maintain improvement.

The mechanism of action of IVIg in DM may be by inhibiting the deposition of activated complement fragment on the capillaries [27], by suppressing cytokines, especially ICAM-1, or by saturating Fc receptors and interfering with the action of macrophages [so].

A controlled double-blind study for PM is still underway in our institution.

IVIg also has been effective in some patients with IBM. In an open pilot trial, 3 of 4 of our patients responded [Sl]. Although the improvement was not dramatic, it made a difference to the patients' lifestyles. A controlled double-blind study for IBM is now near completion in our institution. This study will be important because in our experience IBM patients do not respond to any immunosuppressive therapy. 

Fig 2 .2Fig 2. Cross sections of muscle biopsy specimen from a patient with dermatomyositis (DM) (A) and another with inclusionbody myositis (IBM) (B) stained for Ulex europaeus and avidin-rhodamine. The number of capillaries is reduced only in DM, especially perifascicubrly. Further, their diameter is increased to compensate far the loss of endomysial capillaries. In contrast, in IBM the number and the diameter of capillaries are nomal.

Fig 3). Immunophenotypic analysis of the lymphocytic infiltrates demonstrates B cells and CD4' cells in the perimysial and perivascular regions, supporting the humoral-mediated mechanism described above [4, 3 13.

Fig 4 .4Fig 4. Cross sections of muscle biopsy specimens from patients

Iexpress my appreciation to Dr Isabel Illa for helping with immunocytochemistry; to Dr Daniel Stein for helping with immunocytochemistry of ICAM-I; and to all my neuromuscular fellows at NINDS for helping with the care of my patients.

). The MAC deposition on the intramuscular capillaries leads through osmotic lysis of the endothelial cells to necrosis of the capillaries (see Fig l), resulting in marked reduction in the number of capillaries per each muscle fiber and dilatation of the remaining capillaries in an effort to compensate for the impaired perfusion (Fig 2). Larger intramuscular blood vessels are also affected in the same pattern, leading to muscle fiber destruction, often resembling microin-Dalakas: Immune Mechanisms in Polymyositis and Dermatomyositis S77 15318249, 1995, S1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ana.410370709 by University Of Illinois At Urbana Champaign, Wiley Online Library on [13/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Ulex (ghost capillariesj. S78 Annals of Neurology Supplement 1 to Volume 37, 1995 15318249, 1995, S1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ana.410370709 by University Of Illinois At Urbana Champaign, Wiley Online Library on [13/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

15318249, 1995, S1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ana.410370709 by University Of Illinois At Urbana Champaign, Wiley Online Library on [13/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

15318249, 1995, S1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ana.410370709 by University Of Illinois At Urbana Champaign, Wiley Online Library on [13/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License after 3 to 6 months of treatment, patience is required before it is concluded that the drug is ineffective. Azathioprine, which is metabolized by xanthine oxidase, if

