Inclusion body myositis and paraproteinemia: Incidence and immunopathologic correlations

Serum from 70 patients with sporadic inclusion body myositis (IBM) was subjected to agarose gel immunofixation electrophoresis. The IgG extracted from 9 patients with monoclonal proteins, 3 without, and 2 control subjects and was purified, biotinylated, and applied to muscle biopsy sections for immunocytochemistry and to purified muscle protein fractions for immunoblots. Sixteen of 70 (22.8%) patients with IBM, compared with 2% of agematched controls, had a monoclonal gammopathy characterized as IgGh in 9 patients, IgGK in 4, IgMK in 2, and IgAA in 1. The mean age o f IBM patients with gammopathy was 60.6 years (range, 35-77 year& compared with 66.1 years (range, 42-80 years) of the IBM patients without gammopathy. The IgG of the patients, more often than that of the control subjects, immunostained myonuclei and recognized various muscle proteins of 35 to 145 kd. We conclude that IBM, regardless of age, is frequently associated with monoclonal gammopathies, which often recognize various muscle components, especially myonuclei, suggesting disturbed immunoregulation.

20892-1382.

ies or another autoimmune disease [ 5 ] ; and (3) the disease can occur in a setting of primary immunodeficiency [6] or infection with retroviruses [7]. The presence of a monoclonal gammopathy, noted in the serum of 2 of our IBM patients since 1989, prompted us to search all our consecutive IBM patients with immunofixation electrophoresis. Although the observation can be fortuitous, monoclonal gammopathies in other neurological diseases are associated with specific antibody activity against neural or myelin antigens [8].

We report the frequency of monoclonal spikes and their immunologic specificity in consecutively studied IBM patients and controls.

Patients and Methods

Patients

We studied 109 patients referred for IBM based on clinical and histopathological criteria [l-31. All patients admitted to the Neuromuscular Diseases Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, had a diagnostic muscle biopsy, complete blood chemistry, hematology profile, screening for various autoantibodies, quantitative immunoglobulins, and serum protein electrophoresis. After excluding familial cases and patients with a coexisting autoimmune disease, immunodeficiency, or malignancy, a total of 70 patients with bona fide sporadic IBM were studied. The frequency of monoclonal gammopathies in age-matched populations, without neuropathy, was calculated in 80 randomly chosen patients with various neuromuscular diseases including postpolio syndrome, dermatomyositis, and amyo-trophic lateral sclerosis.

Biotinylation of Purijied Human IgG

T o check for specific immunoreactivity and avoid nonspecific binding of human serum to muscle biopsy sections, the serum IgG from 12 IBM patients (9 with monoclonal spikes and 3 without) and from 2 patients with neuropathy and gammopathy was purified and biotinylated as described [8].

Iminunocytochemistly

The biotinylated IgG (dilution 1 : 10) was applied to freshfrozen sections from normal human muscle and to muscle biopsies from IBM patients with or without monoclonal spikes, followed by avidin-biotin peroxidase or fluoresceinlabeled secondary antibody (ABC kit, Vector Laboratories), as described [9]. Serum from these patients and 50 nonimmune controls (diluted 1 :40 to 1 : 320) was also applied to rat liver, thymus, and kidneys in a standard immunofluorescent assay of antinuclear antibodies.

Western Blots of Muscle Protein Extracts

To identify if the patients' IgG recognizes cytoplasmic, membrane, or nuclear proteins, normal human muscle was homogenized and centrifuged at 10,000 rpm. Respective fractions were obrained by further homogenizing the pellets in buffer containing Triton X-100 2%, according to standard methods. All fractions were electrophoresed in 10% polyacrylamide gels, transferred to nitrocellulose filters, and incubated with the patients' serum followed by peroxidase-conju-gated anti-human IgG, anti-K, and anti-h light chain antibodies. In addition to IBM patients with gammopathies, the sera from 18 patients with IBM without gammopathy and from 6 patients with paraproteinemic polyneuropathy were also examined.   ). Application of serum to rat tissues showed an antinuclear antibody reaction in some of the patients but not the 50 controls.

Results

Immunoelectrophoresis

Western Blots

In the muscle membrane fraction, 5 of 9 tested IBM patients (2 with IgGK, 2 with IgGh, and 1 with IGMK) and 1 of 6 paraproteinemic neuropathy controls immunoreacted with various -40 to 60-kd proteins (Table ). In the cytoplasmic fraction, bands of 30 to 60 kd were recognized by 8 of 9 IBM patients with gammopathy, 2 of 10 IBM patients without gammopathy, and 2 of 6 gammopathy controls (see Table ). In the myonuclei fraction, various bands of 35 to 50 kd (3 patients), 55 to 95 kd (2 patients), and 145 kd ( 2 patients) were recognized by 7 of 9 IBM patients with gammopathies, 5 of 15 IBM patients without a gammopathy, and 1 of 6 gammopathy controls (see Table ).

Collectively, 50% of patients with IBM with or without monoclonal immunoglobulins recognized nuclei by immunocytochemistry. Further, 77.7% of IBM patients with a gammopathy, compared with 22.8% of those without a gammopathy and 16.6% of paraproteinemic control sera, recognized various muscle membrane, satcoplasmic, or nuclear proteins (see Table ).

Traditional Antinuclear Antibodies

Among 1 1 IBM patients with gammopathy tested for antinuclear antibodies, only 2 had titers higher than 1 : 80.

Discussion

An increased frequency (up to 22.7%) of monoclonal gammopathy was seen in patients with sporadic IBM. The association is not coincidental or age related because (1) the series of screened patients was large; (2) the age of IBM patients with gammopathy was lower than those without; (3) there was no other associated condition to explain it; (4)  dyscrasic amyloidosis [12, 131. There were no signs, however, to suggest that the IgG was amyloidogenic because it did not bind to the intracellular amyloid deposits (not shown). Further, the incidence of amyloid within the vacuolated fibers seen in IBM patients [14], was the same in patients with or without gammopathies.

The binding of the IgG to myonuclei, observed even in the 1BM patients without gammopathies, was not artifactual because it was noted immunocytochemically with the purified IgG, and not with the whole serum, which may bind nonspecifically to and around muscle fibers. Further, with western blots on nuclear extracts, binding was much more frequent with the sera of IBM patients compared with that of the paraproteinemic neuropathy controls (see Table ), supporting the reported observation that paraproteins do not have high incidence of antinuclear or anti-DNA autoantibody binding activity [15]. This is also consistent with our finding of antinuclear antibodies in only 2 of 11 IBM patients with gammopathy. The immunoglobulin of the IBM patients recognized, in addition to nuclei, cytoplasmic antigens (see Table ), probably due to incomplete separation of the various organelles in the extracted cellular fractions or due to contamination of the contiguous cytomembranes by nuclear contents dis- tern is connected with the T cell-mediated and MHC-I class restricted immunopathologic process observed in these patients' muscles [3, 41. A primary involvement of the nuclei has been implicated in IBM patients on the basis of cDNA probes deposited on the myonuclei [ 161. Further, accumulation of tubulofilaments within the myonuclei bursting into the cytoplasm is commonly seen in the disease. If IBM begins from the myonuclei, as suggested [16], it is possible that nuclear proteins released in the cytoplasm and the membrane may serve as self-antigens bound to MHC-I antigen for presentation to CD8' T cells.

Although the association of IBM with a monoclonal gammopathy does not define a clinicopathologically distinct subset, it suggests that in some patients there is disturbed immune regulation resulting in B-cell activation. The observations support the view that autoimmune processes may be common in IBM patients. Although autosomal recessive and X-linked inheritance have been reported, the autosomal dominant form, for which two loci have been identified, is predominant. CMTlA, which is the most frequent, is linked to the chromosome 17~11.2, whereas CMT1B is caused by the gene coding for the myelin protein PO, which is located on chromosome lp22 [3-71. In most cases, CMTIA is associated with a duplication of the 1.5-Mb region in 1 7 ~1 1 . 2 18-10] that contains the gene coding for peripheral myelin protein 22 (PMP22), in which mutations are found in CMTlA patients without duplications [I 1, 121. It has been hypothesized that increased dosage of the PMP22 gene is the cause of the CMTlA associated with the 1 7 ~1 1 . 2 duplication 1131. The observation of a more severe phenotype in a single homozygote for the 1 7 ~1 1 . 2 duplication supported this hypothesis [8, 141, and suggested that CMTlA with duplication was a semidominant disease.

We performed a clinical, electrophysiological, and genetic study of a consanguinous CMTl family with 4 affected siblings, 3 of whom were homozygous for the 17p 1 1.2 duplication and 1 was heterozygous. Comparison of their phenotypes showed that the severity of the disease was variable among the homozygotes, 1 of whom was not more severely affected than the heterozygous sibling who was paucisymptomatic. These results suggest that the severity of the disease is determined not only by the number of copies of the PMP22 gene. All patients but 1 (Patient 6) were examined a second time, after a 3-year interval. Age at onset and filnctional disability were determined from clinical histories. Deep tendon reflexes as well as motor and sensory functions were explored in the four limbs. Amyotrophy, pes caws, and nerve hypertrophy were systematically searched for.

Materials and Methods

Clinical and Electrophysiological Examination

FigFig I . Immunojxation electrophoresis of semm fFom 2 patients with inclusion body myositis and monoclonal garnmopathy demonstrates the presence of a monoclona~ IgMK in I patient (A) and of an IgAA in another patient (B).

The index patient (Patient 1) and 5 relatives (Patients 2, 3, 5, 6, and 7) from Family SAL-1025 (Fig) underwent clinical and electrophysiological examinations. The parents were first cousins.

, 1997, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ana.410410116 by University Of Illinois At Urbana Champaign, Wiley Online Library on [10/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License15318249the incidence of parapro-teins in nonneuropathy patients of the same age was2%; and ( 5 ) such a high frequency of paraproteins isnot seen in patients of similar age [lo], or in patientswith neuropathies where gammopathies occur in up to10% [I 11. Although the pathogenetic significance ofthe monoclonal spikes is unclear, the high frequencyin IBM patients suggests chronic B-cell activation.The gammopathy was often of the h light chain, the type most frequently connected with the plasma-cell Brief Communication: Dalakas et al: IBM and Paraproteinemia 101 ~~ ~~ ~~ Fig 2. Cross section of a normal muscle biopsy is immunostained with the pur;J;ed and biotinylated IgG from a patient with inclusion body myositis (IBM) and monoclonal I ~G K gammopathy (A) and IgG from a control patient (B), followed by JEuorescein-conjugated anti-human IgG. The IgG fiom an IBMpatient (A), but not a disease control (B), bind to myonuclei ( X 475 before 74% reduction). Application of the same biotinylated IgGs to the patient j own muscle biopsy, followed by peroxiddce-conjugated anti-lgG, demonstrates binding of the IgG from the IBM patient to homologous myonuclei (C). The control IgG (0) did not react ( X 850 before 78% reduction).

Immunoreactive Patterns of Patients with IBM and Monoclonal Gummopathies (Spikes) 'Number of patients with IBM and monoclonal spikes that immunostained nuclei or reacted with muscle proteins. bNumber of patients with IBM without monoclonal spikes that immunostained nuclei or reacted with muscle proteins [molecular mass in brackets]. 'Number of control sera with paraproteinemic neuropathy that immunostained nuclei or reacted with muscle proteins [molecular mass in brackets].Western Blots of Muscle ProteinsNuclear Staining byPatientsImmunocytochemistryMembrane (kd)Cytoplasm (kd)Myonuclei Extracts (kd)IBM with spikes1 2 3100 --25 40 -75 145, 50 -460, 8028, 70355 6 760 40, 60 -66 35, 42, 56 30145 --830, 4056509-3095Total519"8/9a7 / 9 a(n = 9)IBM without spikes1 / 1 62/10b(n = 18)DO1[40, 471Control sera with spikes116'21@(n = 6)140, 601[30, 57; 30, 451charged during myonuclei disintegration.It is uncertain if the recognition of nuclear antigensby the monoclonal immunoglobulin plays a role in thepathogenesis of IBM or if such an inimunoreactive pat-IBM = inclusion body myositis.

-Tooth type 1A disease is an inherited sen- sorimotor neuropathy that is most often associated with a duplication of chromosome 17~11.2. This region con- tains the gene of the peripheral myelin protein 22 (PMP22), which is responsible by a gene dosage effect for the Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 1A phenotype with 17pl1.2 duplication. We performed a clinical, electro- physiological, and genetic study of a consanguinous Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 1A family with 4 affected sib- lings, 3 of whom were homozygous for the 1 7 ~1 1 . 2 du- plication, the other a heterozygote. Comparison of phe- notypes showed that the severity of the disease was variable among the homozygotes, one of whom was no more severely affected than the heterozygous sibling who was pancisymptomatic. These results suggest that the se- verity of the disease is not determined solely by the num- ber of copies of the PMP22 gene.16. Nalbantoglu J, Karpati G, Carpenter S. Conspicuous accumulation of a single-stranded DNA binding protein in skeletal muscle fibers in inclusion body myositis. Am J Pathol 1994; 144:874-882 1996, and in revised form Jun 28. Accepted for publication Jui 3, 1996. Address correspondence to Dr LeGuern, INSERM U283, Hapita1 de la SalpOtrikre, 47 Hd de l'H6pita1, 75651 Paris cedex 13, France.Patients Homozyg;ous for the 17p 1 1.2 Dugication in Charcot-Marie-Tooth Type IA Disease E. LeGuern, MD, PhD,*t R. Gouider, MD,J5 D. Mabin, MD,S S. Tardieu, BS,* N. Birouk, MD,$ P. Parent, MD,# P. Bouche, MD,$ and A. Brice, MD*t Charcot-MarieLeCuern E, Gouider R, Mabin D, Tardieu S, Birouk N, Parent P, Bouche P, Brice A. Patients homozygous for the 17pl1.2 duplication in Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 1A disease. Ann Neurol 1997;41:104-108 Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease represents a ge-netically heterogeneous group of hereditary sensorimo-tor neuropathies. The most common of the seven types described by Dyck and colleagues in 1993 [I] is the demyelinating or hypertrophic form, CMT type 1 (CMTl). In Europe, the prevalence of this disorder is From *Instirut National de la Sank et de la Recherche MPdicale U289, t Federation de Neurologie, and $Service d'Explorations Fonctionnelles Neurologiques, H6pital de la SalpCtri&re, Paris; SSer-vice d'Explorations Fonctionnelles Neurologiques and 'Service de PPdiatrie, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire. Morvan, Brest, France; and SService de Neurologie, H6pital Charles Nicolle, Tunis, Tu-nisia. Received May 2, approximately 10 per I 00,000. Clinical onset usually occurs in the second decade, but clinical penetrance is age dependent. Patients present with slowly progressive muscle weakness and atrophy, mainly of the distal limb muscles; sensory loss; and absence or reduced tendon reflexes, often associated with pes caws 121. Clinical severity is extremely variable: Some affected subjects remain asymptomatic their whole lives, while others have severe footdrop and foot deformities, or are even confined to wheelchairs. In contrast, all gene carriers, symptomatic or not, show markedly reduced nerve conduction velocities. Nerve biopsy studies show de-creased numbers of myelinating fibers and a segmental pattern of extensive demyelination and remyelination with hyperproliferation of Schwann cells forming "on-ion bulbs" [ 11.

