Apolipoprotein E and apolipoprotein E messenger RNA in muscle of inclusion body myositis and myopathies

Sporadic inclusion body myositis and the hereditary inclusion body myopathies are severe, progressive muscle diseases, characterized pathologically by vacuolated muscle fibers containing paired helical filaments. We immunostained muscle biopsy specimens from sporadic inclusion body myositis, hereditary inclusion body myopathy, disease control, and normal patients with several antibodies against apolipoprotein E (ApoE). Approximately 80 to 90% of the vacuolated muscle fibers of sporadic inclusion body myositis contained well-defined, strongly immunoreactive ApoE inclusions, In hereditary inclusion body myopathy, only rare vacuolated fibers had immunoreactive inclusions, whereas most had diffuse cytoplasmic ApoE immunoreactivity. Ultrastructurally, ApoE immunoreactivity in sporadic myositis was localized mainly to the paired helical filaments. By contrast, in the hereditary form, ApoE immunoreactivity occurred on material in close proximity to the paired helical filaments, but never was on the paired helical filaments. In both muscle diseases, ApoE was also on the 6-to 10-nm filaments and amorphous material. In the sporadic form, ApoE-immunoreactive deposits colocalized with Congo red-positive deposits; however, in muscle fibers from patients with hereditary disease there was no congophilia. ApoE messenger RNA was not detectable in muscle fibers from patients with hereditary or sporadic disease but was expressed abundantly in muscle macrophages. In all control and inclusion body myositis or myopathy biopsy specimens, ApoE immunoreactivity was strong at the postsynaptic domain of neuromuscular junctions; nonjunctional regions of normal fibers were negative for ApoE. ApoE immunoreactivity occurred diffusely in regenerating muscle fibers, a subset of which had detectable ApoE messenger RNA.

PHFs lack some immunoreactive epitopes of phosphorylated tau [ 5 , 113. Increased apolipopritein E (ApoE) imniunoreactivity is present in vacuolated muscle fibers of both sand h-IBM [ 121.

W e now report (a) a difference in the expression of ApoE immunoreactivity between sand h-IBM muscle fibers as revealed by light and electron microscopic immunocytochemistry; (b) close correlation between ApoE immunoreactivity and congophilia in s-IBM; (c) lack of detectable ApoE tnRNA in abnormal muscle fibers of both s-and h-IRM by in situ hybridization; and (d) strong ApoE immunoreactivity at normal human neuromuscular junctions (NMJs), and moderate activity in human regenerating muscle fibers.

Materials and Methods Patients

We studied diagnostic muscle biopsy specimens (obtained with informed consent) from 38 patients with the following diagnoses: s-IBM ( I 2 patients), autosomal recessive h-IBM (9 patients from 7 Persian-Jewish families), autosomal dominant h-IBM (3 patients) [ 131, polymyositis (7 patients), morphologically nonspecific myopathy (3 patients), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( 4 patients). We also studied normal muscle from 8 patients. All diagnoses were based on clinical and laboratory studies, including 18-reaction histochemistry of the muscle biopsy specimen 1141. All s-and h-IBM patients had rypical clinical features and PHFs as shown by electron microscopy. All s-IBM patients had squiggly Congo red positivity identified by the enhancement technique [IS] in 60 to 80% of their vacuolated niuscle fibers. None of the uitosonral recessive h-IBM patients had Congo red positivity, even with enhancement. Ten percent of vacuolated mus- cle fibers in autosomal dominant h-IRM had round Congo red-positive inclusions [13]. Each s-and h-IBM muscle biopsy specimen contained between 10 and 20 vacuolated muscle fibers.

Light Microscopic /mmunorytochemistry

Imm~inocytochemicaI stainings were performed on 10-pm transverse sections of fresh-frozen muscle biopsy specimen:, using peroxidase-antiperoxidase (PAP) and fluorescence methods, as described [4-6, 81. The following antibodies against human ApoE were used: rabbit (GHE3-14) and goar (GHREl-5) polyclonal antisera [16], both diluted 1: 1,000: goat polyclonal antiserum (Cortex Biochem, San Leandro, CA), diluted 1 : 50; and mouse monoclonal antibody (Chemicon, Teniecula, CA), diluted 1 : 100. The following controls for staining specificity were used: (a) preabsorption of primary antibodies with purified human ApoE (Calbiochem), and (b) omission of the primary antibody or its replacement with noninimune serum.

Double imniunofluorescence using polyclonal antiserum against ApoE combined with either (a) a monoclonal antibody against ubiquitin (Cheniicon, Teniecula, CA), diluted 1 : 100, or (b) a monoclonal antibody against P-amyloid protein (G-OP-I) [17], diluted 1 : 100, was performed using fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC), Texas red, or 7-amino-4-methylcoumarin acetic acid (AMCA)-labeled secondary antisera, as described 14-6, 8, 181.

Macrophages were identified with the monoclonal antibody Ber-MAC 3 (Dako, Carpenteria, CA), diluted 1 : 50, and regenerating muscle fibers identified with a monoclonal antibody against desmin (Zymed, South San Francisco, CA), diluted 1 : 100, as described [9]. Tetramethylrhodamine-labeled a-bungarotoxin (aBT) (Molecular Probes) was used to identifi. NMJs [ 181.  I n triple labeling of the NMJs, we used the following: (a) a polyclonal antiserum against ApoE, followed by a FITC-labeled secondary antibody; (b) rhodamine-labeled a B T (to identify the postsynaptic component); and (c) SMI-3 1 antibody against phosphorylated neurofilanient, followed by AMCA-labeled secondary antibody (to identify the presynaptic component).

To colocalize ApoE inimunoreactivity with Congo red positivity, one section was inimunostained with anti-ApoE antibody using the PAP method and a serial section was stained with Congo red, as described [15].

Immunoelectron Microscopy

This was performed on 10-pm unfixed frozen sections adhered to the bottom of a 35-mm Petri dish [4-61. I n brief, after incubation with the anti-ApoE antibody, sections were incubated in either gold or horseradish peroxidase (HRP)conjugated secondary antisera, and then processed for electron microscopy according to our method for cultured muscle [19].

Riboprobes

The recombinant clone pTVl94 containing the full-length human ApoE3 complementary DNA (cDNA) [20] was amplified by transforming Eschericbi~i coli strain N4830. The AvrrllNde I restriction fragment of ApoE3 cDNA sequence (nucleotides 36-907) was subcloned into the pGEM-3Z vector (Proniega, Madison, WI) downstream to the T7 promoter, using T 4 DNA ligase (GIBCO BRL). Labeled antisense and sense RNA probes were transcribed respectively from k)n I and H i n d I I linearized plasmids, using 30 pmol/ liter of '5S-uridine triphosphate and 10 nimol/liter each of unlabeled adenosine, cytidine, guanosine triphosphates.

In Situ Hybridization

This was performed on 10-pm transverse sections of freshfrozen muscle biopsy specimens, as described [7, 91. I n brief, sections were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde. treated with 0.50/0 acetic anhydride in 0.1 mol/liter of triethanolamine (pH 8.0), and prehybridized for 1 hour at 55°C. Hybridization was performed for 3 hours in prehybridization buffer [7, 91 containing 10% dextran sulfate and the "S-labeled RNA probe (2 X ION cpm/ml). After hybridization, sections were processed as described 17, 91 coarcd with NTK-2 eniulsion (Kodak), and exposed for 6 to 12 weeks. Both sense and antisense probes were used in each experiment.

Results

Light Microscopic Immunocytochemisty

About 80 to 90% of the vacuolated muscle fibers of both s-and h-IRM patients were imrnunoreactive with

Fig 1. (A-H) Light microscopy of ApoE immunocytochemistry using peroxidase-antiperoxidase reaction in sporadic inclusion body myositis 6-IBM) (A-D) and heredita y inclusion body myopathy (h-IBM) (E-H). Strongly immunoreactive and well-delineated

deposits are present in abnormal muscle fibers fiom patients with s-IBM, However, most o f the vacuolated muscle Jibers fiom patients with h-IBM lack strong focal immunoreactivity and have only difisively immunoreactive cytoplasm, except in (H) where there is a small immunoreactive deposit in the vacuole. In h-IBM, there is ojen some accentuation in the periphely region

(F-H). In the tncluszon body muscle diseases, normal muscle fibers are negative in nonjunctional regions. (A-D: X 950; E-H:

X 2,000.

) (I-L) Double-label juorescence immunocytochemisty o f s-IBM abnormal muscle fibers.

There is a close colocalization between ApoE (I) and P-amyloid protein (J), and between ApoE (K) and ubiquitin (L). (J J X 950; r% L: X 1,250.)

ApoE antibodies, all of which gave the same results.

The distribution of ApoE-immunoreactive sites differed between s-and h-IBM. In s-IBM vacuolated muscle fibers, ApoE immunoreactivity was in the form of well-defined, darkly positive inclusions, either within the vacuoles or in the vacuole-free cytoplasm (Figs 1A-ID). The cytoplasm of most of those fibers did not have diffusely increased immunoreactivity.

However, in all patients with h-IBM, both recessive and dominant forms, most of the vacuolated muscle fibers had a diffuse cytoplasmic ApoE immunoreactivity (Figs 1E-1 H), often with peripheral accentuation (Figs  1F-1H). Within a given biopsy specimen, the intensity of the cytoplasmic staining differed among the affected fibers. In all specimens studied, there were infrequent amorphous ApoE-positive inclusions in close proximity to the vacuoles or within them, but they were less strongly stained than the ones present in s-IBM (Figs l G , 1H).  Weak staining was also present at the sarcolemma surrounding the muscle fibers; its intensity varied depending on the antibody. Macrophages, in all biopsy samples that contained them, had weakly positive ApoE immunoreactivity (data not shown).

Immunoelectron Microscopy

Regarding PHFs, there was a striking difference beween s-and h-IBM. In s-IBM specimens, PHFs were strongly labeled with ApoE antibodies (Figs 4A, 4B), in the pattern we described previously for antibodies against phosphorylated tau and ubiquitin [4, 111. By contrast, in h-IBM samples, ApoE immunopositivity occurred on material that was sometimes in close proximity to the PHFs, but the PHFs themselves were never imrnunoreactive (Figs 4C , 4D). In vacuolated muscle fibers from both sand h-IBM patients, ApoE was also localized to amorphous material and 6to 10nm-diameter amyloid-like fibrils ( Figs 4E, 4F); this immunolocalization appeared slightly more pronounced in hthan in s-IBM samples. There was no ApoE immunoreactivity associated with the myelin-like whorls, various lysosomal inclusions, myofibrils, and other pathological and normal structures present in vacuolated muscle fibers from s-or h-IBM patients.

In Situ Hybridization

In sand h-IBM samples, the vacuolated muscle fibers did not have demonstrable ApoE mRNA; a strongly positive ApoE mRNA signal was present only in macrophages infiltrating the muscle (Figs 5A-5D). In a subpopulation of regenerating muscle fibers, without disease specificity, an ApoE mRNA signal of variable intensity was diffusely distributed in the cytoplasm

Discussion

ApoE is a multifunctional apolipoprotein composed of three isoforms, E2, E3, and E4, each encoded by a different allele of a single gene on chromosome 19 [2 1, 221. Its role in lipid transport is well known. Newer studies demonstrated that ApoE plays a role in various cellular events unrelated to lipid transport, including imrnunoregulation, modulation of cell growth and differentiation [22], and nerve regenerarion [23].

Studies of ApoE in AD may be relevant to ones in IBM muscle. In AD, increased ApoE immunoreactivity occurs in arnyloid plaques, neurofibrillaiy tangles, and the cytoplasm of abnormal neurons [24, 251. An increased frequency of the ApoE4 allele is present in both late-onset-familial and sporadic AD [26].

The role of ApoE in the pathogenesis of AD is not understood [27]. In vitro, ApoE binds to 0-amyloid protein [28,291 and induces fibrillogenesis of a soluble P-amyloid [28]. ApoE also binds to amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in sections of AD brain [30]. The binding of ApoE to AD neurofibrillary tangles is mediated by tau [30], but the mechanism and consequences are not understood. Some suggest that ApoE plays a secondary role in neurofibrillary tangle formation, and that its accumulation in abnormal neurons occurs in response to reparative processes [31].

Because ApoE is associated with congophilic amyloid deposits occurring in various types of extracerebral extracellular amyloidoses [32] and because in vitro it induces fibrillogenesis of several potentially amyloidogenic proteins [32, 331, it was proposed that ApoE might serve as a pathological chaperone by altering configuration and homoaggregation of potentially amyloidogenic proteins [32]; the alternative is that the ApoE binding occurs after the congophilic amyloid conformation.

Our investigation raises the possibility that ApoE might be involved in the pathogenesis of IBM. In s-IBM, as in AD brain, we find that ApoE is associated with P-amyloid deposits and with PHFs. Like AD PHFs, the s-IBM PHFs contain phosphorylated tau [5, 111 and ubiquitin [34], and are congophilic [I I]. But in h-IBM the ApoE immunoreactivity in vacuolated muscle fibers is mainly diffuse, it is not associated with the PHFs (note that h-IBM PHFs are not congophilic).

In both s-and h-IBM, transcription of ApoE was undetectable in the abnormal vacuolated muscle fibers, indicating that synthesis of ApoE is not upregulated in these fibers. Therefore, their increased ApoE immunoreactivity may reflect increased ApoE transport into the

Fig 3. Fluorescence immunocytochemisy. (A-C) In normal muscle, triple labeling of the neuromuscular junction (NMJ) with a-bungarotoxin (A), ApoE (3), and SMI-31 antibody against phospho ylated heavy-chain neurOflament (C). There is a close colocalization of ApoE with a-bungarotoxin, which designates the postsynaptic domain of the NMJ but 120 coloca lization with the neu rojilamen t im m uno reactivig, which designates the presynaptic component. (0-G) In a morphologically nonspecific myopatby, double labeling of regenerating muscle fibers with a polyclonal antiserum against apoE (D, F) and a monoclonal antibody against desmin (E, G). Regenerating muscle fibers are ident$ed by strong desinin immunoreactivity, somewhat accentuated in the periphey of the fiber (E, G); these regenerating fibers also have increased ApoE immunoreactivity that is present dzfiisely with some accmtuation in the subsarcolemmal region. (H-J) In normal human muscle, ApoE immunoreactivity is present in axons of the intramuscular nerve twigs (H), muscle capillaries (I), and a large blood vessel 0). Note: In control samples, normal muscle fibers are negative in nonjunctional regions.) (A-C: X

950; D-G: X 1,250; H: X 880; I: X 650;j: X 1,250.)

Fig 4. Gold immunoelectron microscopy of uacuolated muscle fibers in sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM) and hereditary inclusion body myopathy (h-IBM), using a polyclorral antiserum against ApoE and a secondary antibody labeled with 5-vim gold particles. In s-IBM (A, B), paired helical filaments (PHFs) are heavily immunodecorated by gold particles. In h-IBM (C, D), gold' pnrticles immunodecorate clumps of amorphous material in close proximi9 to the PHF, but the PHFs themselves remain j e e of any gold partick (E, F) Irr both s-IBM (E) and h-IBM (F). amorphous material and 6to 10-nm jlaments contain ApoE immunoreactiuity. (A:

X 100,000; B: X 67,000; C, 13: X 86,000; E, E X 94,000.) 

MAC) (B, 0). h i mbrphologirally norispecifc myopnthji (non-IBM). a subset of sinall regenerating Inus& jbers, identijed ON wid sections by n monorlonnl nntibody ngclinst desmiii (E, G), hds a nioder/rte to strorg ApoE mRNA signal (F, H).

(A-D: X 950; E-H: X 1,250.) muscle fiber, increased binding there, or decreased ApoE catabolism within the fiber. The lack of detectable ApoE mRNA in abnormal IBM muscle fibers parallels findings in the A D brain wherein ApoE mRNA is not detectable in normal or abnormal neurons (while present in astrocytes (351.

T h e mechanism and significance of the increased ApoE immunoreactivity at the periphery of some vacuolated muscle fibers of all h-IBM biopsy samples are not known. Whether that ApoE is bound to an increased number of low-density-lipoprotein (LDL) receptors there, or to other proteins accumulated there, remains to be studied. 'The difference in ApoE inimunolocalization between s-and h-IBM muscle fibers may be relevant to their other differences. PHFs that makes them congophilic.

In contrast to AD, occurrence of the ApoE4 allele in the IBMs probably does not contribute to their pathogenesis. One group reported increased frequency of the E4 allele in 14 s-IBM patients [36], but others did not see that increase [37]. Our studies indicated no increased incidence of E4 in either s-or h-IBM [38]. The allelic form of ApoE deposited in IBM fibers is not known because the three ApoE allelic proteins are so nearly identical that currently available antibodies cannot distinguish between them.

How the presence of ApoE-immunoreactive inclusions in vacuolated muscle fibers correlates with other abnormalities existing in s-IBM [ 1, 21, such as lymphocytic inflammatory cell infiltration, nuclear inclusions, and abnormal mitochondria, is currently not known. They do not seem to reflect the inflammation or presence of macrophages because (a) s-IBM vacuolated fibers containing the ApoE immunoreactivity did not have invading mononuclear cell inflammation, including macrophages, and (b) they lacked ApoE mRNA (which is characteristically present in macrophages). Whether in s-IBM the abnormal accumulation of ApoE and other proteins reflects late changes in muscle fibers previously attacked by mononuclear inflammatory cells is not known, but we do not see such ApoE accumulations in chronic polymyositis or dermatomyositis.

Our original observation that ApoE immunoreactivity occurs at human NMJs [39], subsequently confirmed by others [40], is extended in the present study to emphasize its strictly postsynaptic localization there. Our preliminary studies indicate that immunoreactivity of LDL receptors is also increased at the postsynaptic domain of human NMJs. The role of ApoE at the NMJ and the significance of increased LDL receptors there require elucidation.

Increased ApoE immunoreactivity and ApoE mRNA in regenerating human muscle fibers suggests that ApoE may play a role in muscle fiber development and its regeneration in response to injury, similar to that putative role of ApoE in peripheral nerve [23].

Conclusion

Our studies demonstrated another similarity between the cellular pathology of s-IBM muscle and AD brain.

The reason for the similarity between these clinically disparate conditions is unknown, but perhaps within the muscle fiber and the neuron there is a cascade of similar pathogenic steps provoked by similar, but tissue-specific, causes that lead to the abnormal accumulation of similar proteins. An intracellular aging change could be a necessary corequirement in both diseases.

Studies utilizing transfer of potentially detrimental genes into cultured normal human muscle [41], along with culturing muscle from both hand s-IBM patients [42], should facilitate our understanding of intracellu-lar factors prompting the pathogenic steps in both s- and h-IBM and perhaps, by analogy in AD. 

In s-IBM specimens, ApoE irnmunoreactivity colocalized with ubiquitin and P-amyloid immunoreactivities, as demonstrated by double irnmunofluorescence (Figs 11-IL). Such immunocolocalization was not present in h-IBM specimens.

Fig 2 .2Fig 2. In sporadic inclusion body myositis, immunolabeling of pardel (but not adjacent) cross sections with ApoE using peroxidzse-antiperoxidase reaction (A, C) and with Congo red staining uisualized tbru the Texas red filter p t e m (B, D). The same fibers positive with ApoE are also congophilic. (All X 950.)

Fig 5 .5Fig 5. In situ bybridizntion of ApoE mRNA in muscle jibers (A, C, b; Hlfiovn pntievits iuitb sporadic (A, B) or hrreditniy inclusion body myopndy (C, 0). Vaniolr?ted muscle fibers of botli s-IBM nnd Ii-IBM do not hniie identjfnbk ApoE mRNA signal. However, strong~~l positive ApoE nzRNA is prewit in muscle marrophnges identijed on s e d sections iiGt/i n mncrophuge-spec$c marker (rtionoclonal antibody Ber-

Supported in part by grants from the Muscular Dystrophy Association and the National Institutes of Health (to V. A,) and by the Helen Lewis Research Fund. Dr Mirabella was a Telethon-Italy Research Fellow in Dr Askanas' laboratory. Dr Weisgraber is supported in part by the National Institutes of Health Project grant IIL4 1 633.Monoclonal antibody against P-amyloid protein was provided by the late Dr George Glenner. Dr Eva Sarkozi helped with the in situ hybridization.

