Inclusion body myositis: No evidence for a neurogenic component

Because electrophysiologic, clinical, and histopathologic observations have suggested that inclusion body myositis (IBM) may have a coexistent neurogenic component, we used macro-electromyography (macro-EMG) to search for changes in the motor unit territory and signs of reinnervation. We studied 11 patients, aged 53 to 77 years (mean, 65.2 years), with typical, nonfamilial IBM lasting a mean of 8.5 years, and eight healthy volunteers aged 54 to 70 years (mean, 64.6 years), as control subjects. Nerve conduction studies showed focal abnormalities in 5 of the patients, but no evidence of a polyneuropathy. Concentric needle EMG in various proximal and distal muscles of the upper and lower limbs revealed short-or long-duration complex motor unit potentials (MUPs) or a mixture of both types of MUPs. Macro-EMG studies in the tibialis anterior muscle showed smaller macro-MUP amplitudes and areas in patients than in normal subjects. Four patients had abnormal macro-EMG studies with an increased number of small macro-MUPs, 1 patient had an equivocal study with large-amplitude but normal-area macro-MUPs, and the remaining 6 patients had normal studies. These findings are consistent with a primary muscle disorder similar to those seen in other myopathies. We conclude that macro-EMG does not support a coexistent neurogenic component in patients with IBM compared with normal subjects of similar age.

Inclusion body myositis (IBM) is a n inflammatory myopathy with distinct clinical and histologic features. In its typical form, it occurs more often in men than in women, after the age of 50 years, and affects preferentially the biceps, triceps, quadriceps, iliopsoas, tibialis anterior, and the deep finger The characteristic histopathologic findings are redrimmed vacuoles, intracytoplasmic or intranuclear filamentous inclusions, primary endomysial inflammation, increased connective tissue, variable numbers of degenerating and regenerating muscle fibers, and amyloid

In addition, certain pathologic and electrophysiologic findings have suggested the possibility of a coexistent neurogenic component. Angulated atrophic fibers, randomly scattered or in groups, are often present1.4 and although not disease specific, might be considered a sign of denervation. Conventional needle EMG examinations in several ~t u d i e s ' . ~. ~, ~-~ of patients with IBM have shown a n increased number of long-duration, sometimes highamplitude, often polyphasic motor unit potentials (MUPs) with reduced recruitment at times. These "neurogenic-like" MUP changes may be dominant or intermixed with small and short-duration MUPs, and may be more frequent in distal muscles of the lower extremities.] Single-fiber electromyography s t u d i e ~~, ~ have shown increased fiber density and abnormal jitter of moderate to marked severity. Although these findings can be observed in some myopathies, they are indistinguishable from those seen in reinnervating conditions; hence the assumption that their presence in the muscles of patients with IBM may denote a n associated neurogenic process.

To clarify this issue and determine if these changes are related to a distal myopathy or neurogenic process, we performed macro-EMG recordings in a mildly to moderately affected distal muscle of patients with biopsy-confirmed IBM, and compared the results with those obtained from healthy subjects of similar age. Unlike conventional EMG, macro-EMG provides a recording of the electrical activity from the whole motor unit, and can provide important information about the size of the motor units and possible reinnervation changes in IBM. This study was not intended to compare concentric needle EMG with macro-EMG findings, but to analyze the changes in the motor unit territory in a distal muscle commonly affected in IBM.

Patients and methods. We studied 11 patients (10 men, 1 woman) with biopsy-confirmed IBM, aged 53 to 77 years (mean, 65.2 years). Eight healthy volunteers, aged 54 to 70 years (mean, 64.6 years), served as control subjects. Mean age a t the onset of symptoms was 56.7 years. The mean duration from onset of symptoms to time of examination was 8.5 years (range 3 to 20 years). All patients had steadily progressive muscle weakness that was unresponsive to immunosuppression. In all cases, the muscle biopsy had shown mild to severe endomysial inflammation, red-rimmed vacuoles, and the characteristic filamen-tous inclusions by electron microscopy in those specimens examined. None of the patients had a coexistent systemic illness that could be associated with a perlpheral neuropathic process. The patients were randomly selected from a large group of patients with IBM who were being studied in the Neuromuscular Diseases Section at our institution. The protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board, and all subjects gave their written informed consent for the study.

Elcctrophysiologic studies. Nerve condiiction studies were performed in the median, peroneal, and sural nerve with conventional techniques.!' In addition, all patients had diagnostic concentric needle EMG of both the upper and lower limb muscles. The amplitude, durition, and configuration of the concentric MUPs were gxaded from the video monitor by visual analysis, and a qualitative assessment of the predominant MUP pattern (predominantly short-duration MUPs, predominantly long-duration MUPs, or mixed pattern) was made, based on available MUP duration"' values for each particular muscle. Macro-EMG recordings were obtained from a mild to moderately weak tibialis anterior muscle (not weaker than grade 4, MRC Scale), using the methods previously described by Sthlberg. All macro-EMG recordings were made with a Counterpoint electromyograph (Dantec Medical, Denmark) and a modified single-fiber 13MG electrode (Dantec, 13K88). A minimum of 20 macro-MUPs were recorded from at least four insertion sites in each muscle. For each potential, the maximum peak-to-peak amplitude and the total area were measured. The tibialis anterior muscle was chosen because it is a commonly affected distal muscle and may show long-duration MUPs more often than proximal lower limb muscles.'

Because macro-MUPs amplitudes and areas are not normally distributed, we used a square-root transformation of the individual values from each control subject to obtain a more symmetric and normal distribution. We calculated the normal limits for individual values us- ing the mean +-2.5 SD of the square-root values in the normal subjects. In addition, for each normal subject, we determined the median values for the macro-MUP amplitude and area, and calculated the mean median amplitude and area for the normal group. A study was considered abnormal if more than one of the individual values exceeded the mean ? 2.5 SD, or if the median value for a patient exceeded the mean ? 2.5 SD of the median value for the normal subjects. With the mean ? 2.5 SD as the criterion, none of the normal subjects had more than one abnormal value above or below the defined limits for amplitude or area. We also used the Mann-Whitney U test for the analysis of differences in the untransformed data. Statistical significance for both tests was defined as p < 0.05.

Statistics.

Results. Nerve conduction studies. Nerve conduction studies of the median nerve were performed in 9 of the 11 patients, and peroneal and sural nerve studies were performed in all 11 patients. Sensory nerve conduction studies (median and sural nerves) were normal in all patients except for two, in whom the amplitude of the median sensory action potentials was borderline normal (11 and 12 pV; normal > 10 pV) with mildly or severely slowed sensory conduction velocities (48 and 33 d s ; normal > 50 d s ) . One of these patients also had a prolonged distal motor latency (5.6 ms; normal 5 4.5 ms).

The motor conduction velocities of proximal and distal segments were normal in all patients except fior one, who had a borderline prolonged minimal F wave latency from the peroneal nerve (59 ms; normal 5 56 ms), with preserved distal velocity and latency. In two other patients, the amplitude of the compound muscle action potential (CMAP) from the extensor digitorum brevis was reduced (0.5 and 1 mV; normal 2 2 mVj, with preserved distal latency and conduction velocity. One of these patients also had a reduced amplitude CMAP from the abductor pollicis brevis (4.0 mV; normal 2 4.5 mV), with a normal velocity, suggesting generalized muscle atrophy.

Concentric needle EMG was performed in 32 muscles of the patient group, with an average of 2.9 muscles per patient. Thirty-one muscles (97%) showed abnormally increased insertion and spontaneous activity in the form of fibrillation, positive sharp waves, and complex repetitive discharges, ranging in severity from I + to 3+ ,I2 On minimal voluntary activation, visual analysis of the EMG activity revealed three major patterns in a given muscle: predominantly short-duration MUPs, predominantly long-duration MUPs, or a mixture of short-and long-duration MUPs. All patients had a markedly increased number of complex or polyphasic MUPs. Of the 32 muscles examined, 9 muscles (28%) showed an excess of short-duration MUPs, 5 muscles 16% ) showed predominantly long-duration MUPs, and 18 (56% muscles showed primarily a mixed pattern. The tibialis anterior muscle was examined with a concentric needle in 7 of the 11 patients. Six of the 7 muscles (86%) showed a predominance of long-duration MUPs or a mixed long-and short-duration pattern, whereas only 1 muscle ( 14% showed a predominance of short-duration MUPs.

Macro-EMG. Results of the macro-EMG studies are summarized in the table. We obtained and analyzed 20 to 26 macro-MUPs per patient (mean, 22.4 macro-MUPs) except for one patient, in whom only 11 macro-MUPs were recorded because of poor tolerance to the examination.

The lower limit of normal for the individual macro-MUP amplitudes was 38 FV and the upper limit of normal was 902 pV. The normal limits for the median macro-MUP amplitudes were 6!3.1 pV and 602.7 pV. Based on these limits, an abnormal study was found in two patients who had an excessive number of reduced-amplitude macro-MUPs, and in one patient who had an excessive number of large-amplitude macro-MUPs (2 of 21 macro-MUPs); the remaining eight patients had a normal study. In the patients, 172 (73%) of the individual macro-MUP amplitudes were below the normal mean median amplitude by an average of 49%. In the normal subjects by contrast, 96 (54%) were below the mean median by an average of 34%.

Macro-MUP area. The lower limit of normal for the individual macro-MUP areas was 131 FV x ms and the upper limit of normal was 2,968 pV x ms. The normal limits for the median macro-MUP area were 399.5 pV x ms and 1,808 FV x ms. Based on these limits, an abnormal study was found in four patients who had (in excessive number of reduced-area macro-MUPs; the remaining seven patients had normal macro-MUP areas. In contrast with the macro-MUP amplitude, none of the patimts had an abnormal number of enlarged macro-MUP areas. In the patients, 183 (78%) of the individual macro-MUP areas

Concentric needle EMG.

Macro-MUP amplitude. were below the normal mean median area by an average of 50%. In the normal subjects, by contrast, 94 (53%) were below the mean median by an average of 34%.

When the individual macro-MUP measurements were grouped (figure l), it was evident that both the amplitude and the area of the macro-MUPs were significantly smaller in the patients than in the normal subjects (both, p = 0.0001). The median values for amplitude and area were also generally smaller in the patients than in the normal subjects (figure 2). In the patients, all but one of the median values for amplitude (patient 11) or area (patient 8) were significantly below the normal subjects' mean median for each respective measurement, as shown by the percentage change from the normal mean median (see the table).

Discussion. In patients with typical IBM, with no known coexistent disorder that could affect the peripheral nerves, the nerve conduction studies showed no abnormalities that would suggest the presence of a diffuse motor or sensory polyneuropathy. Two patients had reduced CMAPs from foot muscles, but preserved distal latencies and conduction velocities, indicating most likely the presence of muscle atrophy from the primary muscle disorder, and two other patients had a coincidental median nerve entrapment at the wrist. These results are in agreement with those of previous studies showing minimal or no abnormalities in nerve conduction s t u d i e ~. ~. ~. ~~~ Our results from the conventional needle-EMG ex-amination were similar to those reported in other which were characterized by diffuse abnormal spontaneous activity and the frequent occurrence of both short-and long-duration, often polyphasic, MUPs, with the long-duration potentials frequently occurring in a distal lower limb muscle. These changes in motor unit configuration, although often seen in neurogenic illness, are not uncommon in myopathies and are probably due to extensive motor unit remodeling associated with muscle fiber destruction and regeneration. Computer simulation studies of the concentric MUP in myopathy,I3 as well as studies correlating electrophysiologic and histologic features,14J5 have shown that concentric MUPs with increased complexity and prolonged duration, and sometimes high amplitude, may result from mechanisms other than reinnervation, such as increased variability of muscle fiber diameter or regeneration or hypertrophy of muscle fibers, all features commonly seen in muscle biopsy specimens of patients with IBM. In addition, in very severe and chronic myopathic processes such as IBM, muscle fibers are randomly lost, so all the muscle fibers from a motor unit could also be lost, resulting in the dropout of entire MUPs and decreased recruitment on activation resembling a typical "neurogenic pattern."16 Further, the limited representation of the motor unit provided by recordings with concentric or

Figure 1. Distribution of macro-MUP amplitudes and areas in normal subjects (open histogram) and patients (shaded histogram).

There is a significant difference (p = 0.0001) in both measurements between the two groups, with a trend toward smaller values in the patients. Median amplitude (pV)

Comparison of macro-MUP median amplitudes and areas in normal subjects and patients. ,In the patients, the median values are significantly (amplitude p = 0.039; area p = 0.00821 smaller than i n the normal subjects.

monopolar needles, which have a limited pick-up area, may give the erroneous impression of a neurogenic process. Single-fiber EMG studies in IBM have also shown varying degrees of increased fiber density and jitt e ~. ~. "

Although increased fiber density indicates an increase in the density of muscle fibers per unit area, it does not necessarily imply reinnervation, since in myopathies, longitudinal splitting of muscle fibers, ephaptic transmission between muscle fibers, regenerating fibers, or reinnervation of myogenously denervated fibers may result in high fiber density in certain areas of the motor unit.I7 However, some of these mechanisms could result in a proportional increase in nonsynaptic jitter (mean consecutive difference < 10 ps), a possibility that needs to be explored.

Because of these limitations, we chose macro-EMG, which, as shown in simulation studies,IH provides a recording closely associated with the total number and size of the muscle fibers within the motor unit. The macro-EMG electrode has a large recording surface and measures the potentials from a portion of the motor unit much larger than the conventional concentric or monopolar electrodes, allowing an assessment of the motor unit that is less influenced by focal degenerative or regenerative processes that occur in primary myopathic motor units.

Our results from the macro-EMG studies in a distal muscle showed a n overall decrease in the motor unit size in IBM compared with healthy subjects of similar age. This would indicate that in IBM the motor unit territory is reduced in size, as would be expected with a primary muscle disorder in which there is random loss or atrophy of muscle fibers. These results are clearly different from those observed in reinnervating diseases''' and argue strongly against the possibility of a n associated neurogenic process. Furthermore, the miwro-MUP measurements were not bimodally distributed, which could have been interpreted as a sign of two processes occurring a t the same time, one myopathic and one reinnervating. The majority of our patients' macro-MUPs were within the strictly established "normal" limits, which implies that in IBM the overall reduction in motor unit size is not marked and may fall within the normal variation. Our results are in agreement with those of others,2o d2 who have shown that the macro-MUPs in patients with inflammatory myopathy or muscular dystrophy are normal or only slightly reduced in amplitude. This may represent a relatively preserved number of muscle fibers within the motor unit territory, or may be the result of regenerating or hypertrophic fibers or the closer proximity of the remaining fibers to the electrode, counteracting the loss or atrophy of muscle fibers.'"

The observation that in our patients all but one of the median values for either amplitude or area were smaller than the normal subjects' respective mean median provides further evidence that the process is primarily myopathic. One patient had two macro-MUPs with abnormally increased amplitude, but the area measurements for the same macro-IVIUPs were within the range of normal, suggesting a nonspecific increase in amplitude. None of the median values in the patients was abnormally increased a:; is usually the case in reinnervating conditions.

In IBM, many of the electrophysiologic features observed with conventional electrodes, which have limited recording areas, probably represent focal or local changes due to degenerative apd regenerative processes occurring in the muscle, rather than ex- pansion of the motor unit territory, as is the case with reinnervating conditions. Occasionally, IBM can be confused, clinically or by conventional EMG, with lower motor neuron disease. Macro-EMG may be a useful method of differentiating these two conditions, because in motor neuron disease macro-MUPs are often increased in ~i z e . " ~. ' ~ Article abstract-Proximal myotonic myopathy (PROMM) is a n autosomal dominantly inherited multisystemic disorder characterized by myotonia, proximal muscle weakness, and cataracts. This disorder is not linked to the gene locus of myotonic dystrophy (DM). We describe three new families with PROMM. In all patients, CTG repeats of the DM gene in DNA from blood leukocytes were normal. MRI of the brain revealed a consistent pattern of marked white matter hyperintensity on T,-weighted images in four patients; two additional patients had similar but mild to moderate MRI abnormalities. The morphology of these abnormalities is unknown. Clinical symptoms of brain disease were not consistent and included mental changes with hypersomnia, parkinsonian features, stroke-like episodes, and seizures. The causative relationship of these clinical features with the MRI white matter abnormalities remains to be established. Our observations suggest that PROMM may involve the brain. NEUROLOGY 1997;48:33-37 Proximal myotonic myopathy (PROMM) is a dominantly inherited disorder characterized by proximal weakness, myotonia, cataracts, muscle pain, and elevated levels of gamma-glutamyltransferase (YGT).'-~ In some respects, PROMM resembles myotonic dystrophy (DM), but the genetic basis of the two disorders is different. In contrast to DM, patients with PROMM have no abnormal expansion of a CTG trinucleotide repeat in the 3' untranslated region of the protein kinase gene (Mt-PK1). Linkage studies have excluded the gene locus for DM on chromosome 19 and for sodium-and chloride-channel myotonias on chromosomes 17 and 7.2 The gene locus for PROMM has not been localized.

PROMM runs a more benign course than DM.3 Patients with PROMM have shown no symptoms of brain involvement such as hypersomnia or mental retardation, which frequently occur in DM. We re-

Acknowledgments

We wish to thank Dr. Mark Hallett for reviewing the manuscript, Dr. James Dambrosia for statistical advice, and bIs. B.J. Hessic for skillful editing.

TableSummary of macro-EMG resultslo change from normal% change fromMedian macro-MUPMedian macro-MUPmean median macro-normal mean medianPatientamplitude (kV)area (FV x ms)MUP amplitudemacro-MUP area1284714.5-15.5-35.32209.5618-37.6-44.03139.5488-58.5-55.84300885-10.7-19.85206687-38.7-37.86 7163 236702 626*-51.5 -29.7-36.4 -43.383091121-8.0+ 1.69249.5704.5-25.7-36.21087188-74.1-83.0114481007+33.4-8.8

