Inclusion body myositis in HIV-1 and HTLV-1 infected patients

Sporadic inclusion body myositis (IBM) is the most common inflammatory myopathy affecting patients over the age of 50 years. Dysimmune and degenerative aetiologies have been postulated, but viral infections have not been associated with the disease. Two HIV-1 (human immunodeficiency virus type 1) infected men and one woman infected with HTLV-1 (human T cell leukaemia virus type 1) developed progressive proximal muscle weakness unrelated to antiretroviral therapy. Their muscle biopsies were studied by light and electron microscopy, by immunocytochemistry to determine the expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules and identify the type of infiltrating cells and T cell receptor (TCR) subunits, and by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and single or double immunocytochemistry to search for retrovirally infected endomysial cells.

The clinical features were consistent with sporadic IBM. The muscle biopsies showed primary endomysial inflammation, red-rimmed vacuoles, amyloid deposits, eosinophilic inclusions, and small round fibres in groups, all diagnostic of IBM. The muscle fibres expressed MHC class-I antigens and were invaded primarily by CD8+ T-lymphocytes preferentially bearing TCR V$5.1 and Vf>13 chains. The HIV-1 or HTLV-I antigens were detected only on endomysial macrophages on or around muscle fibres, but not within the muscle fibres. We conclude that IBM occurs in HIV-1 and HTLV-1 infected individuals and has a clinical, histological and immunological pattern identical to sporadic IBM in the nonretrovirally infected patients. Retroviruses do not directly infect the muscle, but persistent retroviral infections may provide superantigenic stimulation and trigger an endomysial inflammatory response identical to that occurring in sporadic IBM.

Introduction

Inclusion body myositis (IBM) is the most common acquired, progressive and disabling inflammatory myopathy affecting patients over the age of 50 years (Dalakas, 1991;Karpati and Carpenter, 1993;Sekul and Dalakas, 1993;Mikol and Engel, 1994;Rowland, 1995). Distal, proximal and swallowing muscles are involved in a characteristic pattern. Histologically, the muscle biopsy is characterized by red-rimmed vacuoles, endomysial T cell infiltrates invading non-necrotic muscle fibres, cytoplasmic inclusions, atrophic fibres and amyloid deposits. With transmission electron microscopy, 18 nm filaments in the nucleus or © Oxford University Press 1996 cytoplasm are present in -90% of patients (Mikol and Engel, 1994). The aetiology of IBM is unclear. The immunopathological findings suggest an immune-mediated process but the lack of response to immunotherapies and the amyloid deposits have raised the possibility of a degenerative disorder. Viral aetiologies have been implicated but not proven.

We describe three retrovirally infected patients, two with HIV-1 and one with HTLV-1, with clinical, immunopathological and histological features identical to sporadic IBM occurring in non-infected patients.

Case summaries

Two HIV-1 infected men and one HTLV-1 infected woman without family history of neuromuscular disease were referred for progressive muscle weakness. They were evaluated neurologically, with EMG, with open muscle biopsy and with biochemical, virological, immunological and serological studies. Their brief case histories follow.

Case 1

The patient, a 37-year-old white man with asymptomatic HIV-1 infection (detected 91 months prior to evaluation), had a 2.5 year history of progressive muscle weakness which began prior to antiretroviral therapy and affected proximal, distal and swallowing muscles. A muscle biopsy was interpreted as inflammatory myopathy with features suggestive of IBM. Oral prednisone (60 mg day" 1 ) and zidovudine (300 mg day"') were initiated without clinical improvement. Symptoms progressed to the point where he was unable to stand up from a chair, walk without a cane, open jars, or swallow normally. When he was admitted to the NIH Clinical Center, his major findings included weakness of the muscles selectively affected in IBM patients (Dalakas, 1991;Sekul and Dalakas, 1993;Mikol and Engel, 1994). These included mild facial muscle weakness, bilateral forearm atrophy, asymmetric weakness (graded from 4 to 4-on the MRC scale) affecting proximal muscles (neck flexors, deltoids, biceps, triceps, iliopsoas, glutei and quadriceps) and distal muscles (wrist extensors and flexors, finger extensors and flexors, intrinsic hand musculature, tibialis anterior, and toe extensors). Sensory examination, tendon reflexes and co-ordination were normal.

Relevant laboratory data included the following: creatine kinase, 174.6 ^tkat I" 1 (normal, 0.87-6.43 u.kat I" 1 ); aldolase, 500.1 nkat I" 1 (16.7-116.7 nkat I" 1 ); lactate dehydrogenase, 15.07 u.kat I" 1 (1.88-3.77 ukat 1"'); alanine aminotransferase, 2.38 U.kat 1"' (0.10-0.70 U.kat "'); aspartate aminotransferase, 2.40 u.kat I" 1 (0.15-0.57 ukat I" 1 ); CD4 + cell count, 208 ml" 1 , erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 66 mm h"' (0-25 mm h" 1 ); IgG, 31.30 g I" 1 (5.23-14.82 g 1-'); IgA, 1.84 g I" 1 (0.51 to 3.75 g I" 1 ; and IgM, 2.16 g 1"' (0.37-2.00 g I" 1 ). Electromyography revealed prominent fibrillations and positive sharp waves with many small short duration motor unit potentials as seen in inflammatory myopathies. Nerve conduction studies were normal. Muscle biopsy revealed severe endomysial inflammation with multivacuolated (red-rimmed and non-rimmed) fibres, necrotic fibres, a wide variation of fibre size including large fibres and small atrophic fibres in groups, internal nuclei and eosinophilic inclusions (Fig. 1A and B). Amyloid was detected in some vacuoles within myofibres (Fig. 1C).

Case 2

The patient was a 37-year-old white man with an asymptomatic HIV-1 infection detected 99 months prior to evaluation. One year later, he developed proximal muscle weakness, myalgia, elevation of creatine kinase and mild dysphagia while receiving zidovudine (AZT) therapy. He underwent a muscle biopsy and was diagnosed with an inflammatory myopathy. Zidovudine was stopped, the pain improved but the weakness remained and progressed over the following 7 years to involve distal muscles. At the time of the NIH evaluation the patient had difficulty climbing stairs, getting up, grasping, manipulating small objects and swallowing solids. He had muscle weakness and findings typically seen in patients with sporadic IBM (Sekul and Dalakas, 1993). There was mild facial muscle weakness, forearm atrophy and weakness (from 4 to 4+ on the MRC scale) in the proximal and distal muscles, including the neck flexors, deltoids, biceps, brachioradialis, triceps, wrist extensors, finger flexors, intrinsic hand musculature, iliopsoas and toe extensors. Sensation was normal except for slightly decreased pinprick and vibration sensation in the toes. Tendon reflexes were absent at the ankles.

Relevant laboratory data included the folowing: creatine kinase, 10.38 ukat I" 1 ; aldolase, 3.50 ukat I" 1 ; lactate dehydrogenase, 3.50 (ikat I" 1 ; alanine aminotransferase, 0.72 (ikat 1~'; aspartate aminotransferase, 0.87 (ikat I" 1 and positive anti-SS-A antibodies. The CD4+ lymphocyte count was 487 cells ml" 1 (19.1%). Serum IgG was 15.50 g I" 1 ; the IgA and IgM were normal. Electromyographic studies revealed mild increased insertional activity with scattered fibrillation potentials and positive sharp waves along with mixed normal and large amplitude long duration polyphasic motor units as seen in sporadic IBM. Nerve conduction studies were normal. Muscle biopsy revealed mild endomysial inflammation, red-rimmed vacuolated fibres, occasional ragged-red fibres, rare necrotic fibres, increased internal nuclei and atrophic fibres in groups (not shown). Amyloid was detected within the myofibres. Additionally, a Type I fibre predominance and mild Type II atrophy were noted.

Special studies Immunocytochemistry

Serial 4 nm sections were fixed in acetone and processed for immunocytochemistry, as previously described (Leon-Monzon et al., 1994), using one of the following monoclonal antibodies and peroxidase labelled anti-mouse IgG at a concentration of 10 ng ml" 1 : (i) anti-CD4 + , CD8 + , CD2 + lymphocyte subsets (Coulter Corporation, Hialea, Fla., USA); (ii) antibodies to macrophage surface marker M-5 (Becton Dickinson, San Jose, Calif., USA); (iii) antibodies to monomorphic determinants of MHC-I (Dako, Carpinteria, Calif., USA); (iv) anti-NK cells (CD56; Becton Dickinson); (v) anti-B cells (CD 16; Becton Dickinson); (vi) antibodies to peptides of the following families of the TCR variable (3 chains: Vp2, Vp3, Vp4, Vp6.1, V(3l6, Vf317, Vpi8, Vp20, V(J21.3, Vp22, Vp23 (Immunotech Inc., Westbrook, Me., USA), Vp5.1, Vp5.2 and 5.3, VP6.7, V08, vpi3 and to the constant region P subunit (Said et al., 1990) (T Cell Diagnostics, Woburn, Mass., USA); (vii) antibodies to the variable a regions of the TCR, Va2 and Va 12.1 families, and against the constant region of the a subunit of the TCR (T Cell Diagnostics) and (viii) antibodies to the gamma delta TCR (Immunotech Inc.). For the TCR studies, control biopsies from five sporadic IBM patients and three dermatomyositis patients were concurrently examined. For the TCR subunit analysis, immunocytochemistry was deemed preferable to PCR analysis because the location of the T cells bearing selective TCR subunits could be localized within the various muscle compartments (endomysial, perimysial or perivascular).

Case 3

The patient, a 58-year-old black woman presented with a 5 month history of slowly progressive proximal muscle weakness and a 3-4 year history of urinary and bowel incontinence. Neurological examination revealed muscle atrophy and weakness (MRC range 3-4) of the deltoids, biceps, triceps, iliopsoas, quadriceps and hamstring muscles. Muscle tone was increased in the lower extremities. Tendon reflexes were normal with bilateral extensor plantar responses. Decreased sensation of pinprick was present at the C5 level and decreased vibratory and position sensation were present in the feet. She was anti-HTLV-1 antibody positive, but anti-HIV-1 antibody negative. The serum creatine kinase was 153.50 |ikat I" 1 . Electromyography revealed positive sharp waves, fibrillations, and short duration low amplitude polyphasic motor units consistent with a myopathy. Nerve conduction studies were normal. Muscle biopsy demonstrated moderate endomysial inflammation, multivacuolated (redrimmed and non-rimmed) fibres, internal nuclei, rare nemaline rods, eosinophilic inclusions, atrophic fibres in groups, increased connective tissue and fatty replacement of muscle fibres. Crystal violet and Congo red stains were positive for amyloid.

Virology

To determine which cell type within the infiltrates was harbouring retroviral antigens, we preformed double immunostaining using mouse monoclonal antibodies to HIV-1 and HTLV-1 (Cellular Products, Buffalo, NY, USA) and antibodies to macrophages, CD4+ cells or CD8 + cells on the same section as described (Ilia et al., 1991;Leon-Monzon et al., 1994). In brief, slides were incubated sequentially with the anti-HIV-1 p24 and gp41 antibodies or with anti-HTLV-l pi9 and gp46, followed by horse biotinylated secondary antimouse-IgG (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, Calif., USA) and avidin rhodamine. Sections were subsequently incubated with one of the antibodies against macrophages, CD4 + , or CD8+ and then with fluorescein conjugated isothiocyanate (FITC) donkey antimouse IgG (Jackson, ImmunoResearch, West Grove, Pa., USA). The slides were mounted, examined with a Zeiss photomicroscope equipped with epifluorescence optics and photographed with FITC filters, rhodamine filters and with a double exposure to visualize both markers on the same cell.

In addition, RT-PCR was performed searching for retroviral integrated sequences within genomic DNA extracted from 50 mg of muscle homogenate as previously described (Leon-Monzon et al., 1993;Leon-Monzon et al., 1994). Amplified products were analysed by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.

Electron microscopy

A separate muscle sample was fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde in cacodylate buffer and embedded in Epon for electron microscopy. Sections were examined for characteristic filaments and retroviral particles.

Results

In all three biopsies, the cellular infiltrates consisted mainly of CD8+ cells followed by macrophages and CD4+ cells (Fig. 2). Less than \% of the cells present were NK or B cells. No gamma delta T cells were detected. Muscle fibres expressed MHC Class-I antigens and were surrounded and invaded by CD8+ T cells, as shown by double immunocytochemistry of antibodies against MHC-1 and CD4+ cells (Fig. 3).

The HIV-1 or HTLV-1 viral proteins were detected only in the infiltrating cells which, by double exposure, were identified as macrophages (Fig. 4). These cells were seen within the muscle fibres and rarely at the site of a vacuole (Fig. 4). No viral antigens were detected within the muscle fibres. The RT-PCR confirmed the presence of retroviral RNA (not shown).

A predominance of T cell receptors expressing V(J5.1 and vp 13 subunits were detected on the endomysial inflammatory cell infiltrates including cells that surrounded or invaded nonnecrotic muscle fibres (Fig. 5). The same subpopulation of cells were also among the lymphocytes trafficking from blood vessels to the endomysium. Only rare Va subunits were detected on the endomysial inflammatory cells. In serial sections the majority of CD8+ cells expressed V(J TCR subunits (not shown), so the infrequent presence of Va subunits was not related to the limited availability of the antibodies against Va subfamilies that we used. Gamma delta TCR positive cells were not detected. Similar findings were observed in the sporadic IBM patients, but not in the dermatomyositis controls, where no preferential predominance of Va or Vp families was noted on the endomysial T cells.

Electron microscopy in specimens from Cases 1 and 2 did not reveal retroviral particles. A search for 18 nm filaments was not successful in the limited samples, reflecting the patchy nature of the disease process.

Discussion

Three retrovirally infected patients had clinical, laboratory and myopathological features identical to those seen in noninfected, sporadic IBM patients, except for the earlier age of onset and the higher elevation of muscle enzymes. Although a chance association cannot be entirely excluded, this seems 2C Fig. 2 Serial sections of muscle from Case 1 stained using the immunoperoxidase method for CD4+ cells (A), CD8+ cells (B), and macrophages (C). The CD8+ cells preferentially surround and invade nonnecrotic muscle fibres (X325).

unlikely considering the occurrence of other inflammatory myopathies with retroviral infections and the early age of onset of IBM in these patients. Muscle biopsy specimens demonstrated all the characteristic features of sporadic IBM including primary inflammation, red-rimmed vacuoles, groups of atrophic fibres, eosinophilic inclusions and amyloid deposits. The inability to detect tubulofilaments may be related to sampling, but the presence of amyloid deposition in conjunction with the other histopathological features satisfies the diagnostic criteria of IBM. These cases demonstrate that IBM, like polymyositis (Dalakas et al., 1986a;Morgan et al., 1989; Dla et a/., 1991; Leon-Monzon  et al., 1993;Leon-Monzon et al., 1994), can be triggered by a retroviral infection.

Although, the immunopathological features of HIV-1 and HTLV-1-associated IBM were identical to those seen in sporadic IBM (Arahata and Engel, 1984;Engel and Arahata, 1984), the mechanism by which these retroviruses trigger the disease is unclear. Retroviral proteins were found only in some of the endomysial macrophages but not within myocytes, suggesting that these viruses do not cause a persistent infection of the muscle fibres (Ilia and Dalakas, 1991;Higuchi et al., 1992;Leon-Monzon et al., 1994). Human muscle in vitro is also resistant to infection with HIV-1, HTLV-1 and HIV-1, or with HTLV-1 infected lymphocytes (Lamperth et al., 1991;Leon-Monzon et al., 1994). Consequently, the recruited endomysial CD8+ T Fig. 5 Cross-section of a muscle biopsy specimen from Case 1 immunostained with antibodies to the VP5.1 T cell receptor subunit and rhodamine conjugated anti-mouse IgG, demonstrate that cells, preferentially expressing V(3 subunits, surround and invade muscle fibres (X750). cells that surround or invade the MHC class-1 expressing non-necrotic muscle fibres in the present cases (Fig. 2) do not recognize retroviral proteins. Whether endogenous peptides on the native myocyte have homology with retrovirally encoded proteins and can be presented to the CD8+ cells by the MHC-1 antigen (molecular mimicry) is unclear. The hypothesis is, however, relevant to the observation that the serum of patients with sporadic IBM recognizes with high frequency, peptides of HTLV-II regulatory proteins (Ilia et al., 1992). Cytokines, which in human myotubes in vitro upregulate various surface molecules (Hohlfeld et al., 1990), may enhance the ongoing immune response and, when secreted by the retrovirally infected endomysial macrophages, can induce MHC-1 antigen expression on the muscle fibres even in areas remote from the inflammation (Fig. 3).

The predominance of TCR P chains detected on the T cell infiltrates that invaded the muscle fibres was intriguing and offers an alternative explanation for T cell recruitment. Selective proliferation of T cells that bear P subunits suggests superantigenic stimulation (Herman et al., 1991). The T cell receptor is typically composed of an a and a P subunit that in combination with a MHC molecule and the presented antigen (the trimolecular complex) result in T cell stimulation. Superantigens, however, bypass this mechanism and directly stimulate TCR P subunits outside the trimolecular complex and without antigen processing. Retroviruses are considered superantigens and a superantigenic mechanism has been implicated in the progression from asymptomatic HIV-1 infection to full-blown AIDS (Pantaleo et al., 1993). The predominance of TCR P subunits we found in the inflammatory cell infiltrates and within cells trafficking from the perivascular areas into the endomysium, suggests that the T cells have not been clonally expanded in situ, as reported in sporadic IBM (Lindberg et al., 1994), but have been recruited to the endomysial tissue after initial stimulation in the periphery by the retroviruses acting as superantigens. Superantigenic stimulation of T cells has also been implicated in the immunopathogenesis of sporadic IBM on the basis of selective amplification of specific TCR VP subunits within the muscle specimens by both PCR (O'Hanlon et al., 1994) and immunocytochemistry (Lindberg et al., 1994).

Histological features typical of IBM with red-rimmed vacuoles have also been observed in monkeys infected with simian immunodeficiency virus, the retrovirus responsible for simian acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (London etal., 1983;Dalakas et al., 19866. 1987). Another retrovirus, the human foamy virus (HFV), has also been implicated in a destructive, vacuolar myopathy in HFV transgenic mice carrying the be! region (Bothe et al., 1991;Aguzzi et al., 1992). Interestingly, HFV bel has homology to HIV-2 tat and has a regulatory function as a transcription transactivator, similar to HIV-1 tat and HTLV-1 tax. Both of these animal models suggest that persistent retroviral infections may trigger sensitized T cells that cause a destructive inflammatory myopathy when they reach muscle. The mechanism of redrimmed vacuolar formation, however, remains unclear. The histopathological and immunopathological similarities of the retrovirally associated IBM with the sporadic IBM suggests that unidentified retroviruses may be considered as candidate viruses in the case of some patients with sporadic IBM even if these viruses persist in tissues other than muscle.

Fig. 11Fig.1Freshly frozen, cross-sections of a muscle biopsy from Case I show primary endomysial inflammation, red-rimmed vacuoles and small round fibres in groups (A and B), all features diagnostic of IBM (Gomori trichrome, A, X289; B, X375). A section from the same muscle biopsy specimen stained with Congo red and viewed with rhodamine filters (C) demonstrates amyloid deposits within the vacuole of one muscle fibre (X653).

Fig. 3 A3Fig.3A muscle specimen from Case 1 dually immunostained for CD8+ cells and rhodamine conjugated anti-mouse IgG (A), and with antibodies to MHC Class-1 and fluorescent conjugated IgG, demonstrates that CD8+ cells (red in A) surround and invade MHC class-1 expressing, non-necrotic muscle fibres (green in B). Double exposure (C) of the superimposition of A and B shows that the CD8+ cells (orange-yellow) invade the areas on the sarcolemma that express the MHC class-1 antigen (X375).

Fig. 44Fig. 4 Sections from the muscle biopsy specimen from Case I immunostained with antibodies against macrophages and fluorescein-conjugated anti-IgG (A), followed by antibodies against HIV-1 (gp41) viral antigen and rhodamine conjugated anti-IgG (B). Two cells shown in B are positive for HIV-1 antigens. Double exposure (C) and superimposition of A (green fluorescence) and B (red fluorescence) produces a yellow color (arrows) indicating that the HIV-1 antigen is present only on macrophages either on the muscle fibre (top arrow) or among the infiltrate (lower arrow) (X480).

