-Amyloid Protein-Containing Inclusions in Skeletal Muscle of Apolipoprotein-E-Deficient Mice

The tibialis anterior muscle and soleus muscle of apolipoprotein-E-deflcient mice were examined by light and electron microscopy. By light micros- copy, sarcoplasmic inclusions were seen in tibi- alis anterior muscle and 40% oftype 2 myofibers were affected in aUl animals over 8 months ofage.

These inclusions reacted for nonspecific ester- ase, cytochrome oxidase, and myoadenylate deaminase and were also periodic acid Schiff positive and stained basopbhlic with hematoxy- lin. Moreover, they reacted immunocytochemicaly with an antibody specific tofragment 17 to 24 of the published sequence of Alzbeimer's cerebrovascular amyloid peptide. Immunoreactiv- ity was lost wben the antibody was adsorbed witb the appropriate synthetic peptide. Ultra- structuraly, the inclusions consisted of tubular arrays and were similar to those observed in human muscle in several pathological condi- tions. In type 1 myofibers ofboth tibialis anterior and soleus muscle, however, mitochondrial ab- normalities including an increase in their num- ber and size were detected, but tubular aggre- gates were not seen. These large mitochondria possessed an electron-dense inner chamber with an increased number of tightly packed cristae. The results obtained suggest that in these mice there is a disturbed lipid metabolism in skeletal muscle fibers that manifests itself with an accu- mulation ofphospholipid in the form of sarcoplasmic reticulum tubules in the type 2ffbers and enlarged mitochondria with tightly packed cris- tae in the type 1 fibers. In addition, f3-amyloid protein was closely associated with the accumulated tubules and vesicles of sarcoplasmic retic- ulum and may represent dysregulation of amy- loid precursor protein metabolism. (Am J Pathol 1997, 150:417-427) Apolipoprotein E (apoE)-deficient mice' 2 were orig- inally developed to provide a suitable animal model for the study of atherogenesis.3 The recent interest in this lipoprotein in Alzheimer's disease,4 however, has resulted in the use of these animals in elucidat- ing the mechanisms of this degenerative disease as well as understanding the metabolism of apoE in the nervous system. ApoE has also been localized in striated skeletal muscle"7 and presumably plays a role in the lipid metabolism of muscle fibers. The latter cannot be understated as muscle fibers need to maintain a highly complex network of phospholipid membranes. Moreover, the tantalizing observa- tion by Valerie Askanas8 and her co-workers in 1992 that 13-amyloid protein accumulates in inclusion body myopathy suggests that related pathomechanisms may exist in Alzheimer's disease and this unusual myopathy. The principal purpose of the present study was to examine striated skeletal muscle of apoE-deficient mice of increasing age at the light and ultrastructural level for evidence of myofiber in- jury on the assumption that lipid metabolism in these myofibers is likely to be disturbed. The results indi- cate that membrane compartments in the myofibers of these mice are structurally altered and reflect the presence of myofiber injury presumably caused by the apoE deficiency.

Materials and Methods Animals

ApoE-deficient mice were generated as described by Plump,1 who injected targeted clones into C57BI/6J (B6) and BALB/cJ host blastocysts and transferred the embryos to surrogate mothers. Chimeric animals were backcrossed to B6. ApoE-deficient homozygous littermates and control B6 animals (both male and female) were sacrificed at 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and 12 months of age (n = 4 per group and time point).

Electron Microscopy

Each animal was anesthetized with Halothane and perfused with 50 ml of saline followed by 50 ml of a mixture containing 2.5% glutaraldehyde and 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.05 mol/L sodium cacodylate buffer, pH 7.4. Tibialis anterior (TA) and soleus mus- cle were removed, trimmed into small blocks, and reimmersed into 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.05 mol/L sodium cacodylate buffer, pH 7.4, for an additional 24 hours. Tissue was processed for transmission electron microscopy by conventional methods and embedded in Araldite. Semi-thin sections (1 p.m thick) were stained with 1% toluidine blue in 5% sodium tetraborate and examined with a Zeiss light microscope. Thin sections (50 nm thick) were pre- pared on an LKB Nova ultramicrotome and exam- ined in a Philips 41OLS transmission electron micro- scope at an accelerating voltage of 80 kV.

Histochemistry

For histochemical evaluation, animals were sacri- ficed by cervical dislocation and the TA and soleus muscles were removed and placed in a solution of isopentane precooled with liquid nitrogen, and 10-,um frozen sections were cut on an Ames cryo- stat. The following histochemical stains were carried out as described in Dubowitz:9 hematoxylin and eo- sin (H&E), modified Gomori trichrome, oil-red 0, nic- otinamide adenine dinucleotide-tetrazolium reduc- tase (NADH-TR), periodic acid Schiff, alkaline phosphatase, acid phosphatase, myofibrillar adenosine triphosphatase (pH 4.3, 4.6, and 9.4), succinic dehydrogenase (SDH), nonspecific esterase, myoadenylate deaminase, cytochrome oxidase, and a von Kossa for calcium identification. Congophilia was assessed using a modified fluorescent tech- nique.10 In addition, muscle was fixed in 4% para- formaldehyde and paraffin embedded for routine H&E sections.

Immunohistochemistry

Paraffin-embedded or paraformaldehyde-fixed fro- zen sections of TA muscle were antigen retrieved with microwave treatment, washed thoroughly in Tris-buffered saline (TBS), blocked with a Zymed Histomouse kit, and reacted with a specific monoclonal antibody to fragment 17 to 24 of the published sequence of Alzheimer's cerebrovascular amyloid peptide11 for 24 hours at 40C. A control section in which the primary antibody (to fragment 17 to 24)   had been adsorbed for 24 hours at 4°C with the correct synthetic peptide (at a concentration of 2 ,ug/ml) was included as a negative control. A suitable section taken from the hippocampal region of a hu- man brain with proven Alzheimer's disease was also included as a positive control. The sections were then incubated in a biotinylated second antibody for 30 minutes at room temperature, washed well in TBS, incubated in 2 drops of biotinylated second-antibody solution for 10 minutes at room temperature, washed well in TBS, and treated with 2 drops of streptavidin/ horseradish peroxidase solution. The final reaction product was visualized by incubating the sections with 2 drops of the substrate chromogen mixture for 20 minutes at room temperature. After a thorough wash in distilled water, the sections were stained with hematoxylin, dehydrated, and mounted in DePeX (Gurr). Similar paraffin sections were also immunocytochemically reacted for a polyclonal anti- body for ubiquitin (Dako, Carpinteria, CA).

Results

Light Microscopy

H&E-stained sections of paraffin-embedded muscle from apoE-deficient mice revealed the presence of 13-Amyloid Protein-Associated Inclusions in ApoE-Deficient Mice 419 vacuoles in several large (type 2) myofibers in the TA muscle. The soleus did not show any conspicuous abnormalities. When frozen sections were stained with H&E, basophilic inclusions were seen in the large fibers (type 2) of TA muscle. Similarly, semi-thin araldite sections of TA stained with toluidine blue displayed the presence of light blue inclusions within the large (type 2) myofibers. All of these inclusions were often near the periphery of fibers and some- times near nuclei, and on several occasions they were multiple. They were most obvious in mice older than 8 months of age. No abnormalities were de- tected in muscle fibers from the control B6 mice.

Histochemical Features

A range of histochemical assays were performed on frozen sections of skeletal muscle from normal and apoE-deficient muscle to characterize the nature of these sarcoplasmic inclusions.

Tibialis Anterior Muscle

In TA muscles of the apoE-deficient mice, the distribution of these inclusions in the various fiber types as well as their histochemical characteristics were determined. They were seen in all apoE-deficient mice older than 6 months, and no difference was detected between male and female animals. They occurred only in type 2 fibers, they were often multiple, and they occupied somewhat less than one-half of the total cross-sectional area of affected fibers. The number of type 2 fibers affected in- creased with age and by 14 months some 40% of these fibers possessed inclusions (Table 1). On lon- gitudinal section, they were often seen to extend for as much as 2 to 4 mm along the length of individual fibers. Abnormalities were not noted in the type 1 fibers of the TA. With a modified Gomori trichrome on fresh-frozen 10-,um sections, the inclusions ap- peared bright red and were not removed by water,   The inclusions showed reaction product in the following histochemical reactions: nonspecific ester- ase (Figure 1, inset), cytochrome oxidase, myoad- enylate deaminase, and periodic acid Schiff (with and without diastase), and they were basophilic in H&E-stained sections. They did not react for NADH- TR, SDH, acid and alkaline phosphatase, ATPase (pH 4.3, 4.6, and 9.5); nor did they stain with oil-red 0, Congo red, or the von Kossa reaction. The histo- chemical results are summarized in Table 2.

Soleus Muscle

The histochemical results on frozen section of so- leus muscle from the apoE-deficient mice and the control B6 strain were compared. Differences in in- tensity and distribution of enzyme reaction product for NADH-TR and SDH in the subsarcoplasmic re- gion of the myofibers were detected. Generally, the myofibers from the apoE-deficient mice (both male and female) displayed large aggregates of reaction product at the periphery of most type 1 fibers when compared with the type 1 fibers in the B6 controls. No other abnormalities were detected.

Immunohistochemical Reactivity

The inclusions in the type 2 fibers of the TA muscle treated with antibody to fragment 17 to 24 of the 03-amyloid peptide were strongly stained in both par- affin and fixed frozen sections after the diaminoben- zidine reaction. (serial frozen sections enabled mus- cle fiber typing). However, those sections, exposed to the same antibody that had been previously adsorbed with the specific peptide overnight, showed a marked decrease in staining intensity ranging from little to no reactivity. On the other hand, the senile plaques in sections of brain with proven Alzheimer's disease, which served as a positive control, stained strongly with the unadsorbed antibody. The inclusions in the type 2 myofibers, however, did not demonstrate any immunoreactivity for ubiquitin.

Electron Microscopy of TA

Blocks from which semi-thin toluidine-blue-stained sections displayed well delineated light-blue sarcoplasmic inclusions were selected. At the electron microscope level, these areas proved to consist of tightly packed aggregates of membrane-lined tubules. The aggregates measured from 0.5 to 3 ,um in diameter (Figure 1) and consisted of parallel tubular arrays. Tubular profiles varied in their appearances and fell into three types. The first type consisted of closely packed clusters of tubules in both longitudinal and transverse section with random alignment (Figure 1). At high magnification, the transverse tubules measured 40 to 95 nm in diameter. Some tubules contained smaller central tubules whereas others contained dense flocculent material (Figure 2a). Second, there were pleomorphic vesicular structures containing electron-dense flocculent ma- terial (Figure 2b). They measured between 50 and 400 nm and were commonly found in a subsarcolem- mal position. Third, there were tubular aggregates containing electron-dense granular material. The ends of these tubules often connected to vesicular sacs (Figure 2c). The diameter of the tubular struc- tures was relatively uniform in diameter and mea- sured 60 to 80 nm. Although a particular tubular profile tended to predominate, all three types could be found in any one aggregate. Generally the aggregates were subsar- colemmal and often paranuclear. Less frequently, they occupied the deeper part of myofibers. Often cisternae of the Golgi apparatus were seen at the periphery of the aggregates. Central nuclei were occasionally found in the affected fibers whereas several lipofuscin bodies, often in the vicinity of the tubular aggregates, were also seen. No other morphological abnormalities were detected. Although tubular aggregates were never seen in type 1 fibers in TA muscle, there was a moderate increase in both number and size of mitochondria observed within these myofibers. Abnormal filamentous structures were not seen.

Electron Microscopy of Soleus Muscle

The number of mitochondria seen at the periphery of many of the type 1 fibers in the apoE-deficient soleus muscle was markedly increased when compared with the normal B6 animals (Figure 2d). The charac- teristic abnormality seen in the type 1 fibers of the soleus was the occurrence of large mitochondria that measured 0.5 to 10 ,um in diameter (Figure 3a). Such mitochondria were often subsarcolemmal, occurred in groups, possessed an electron-dense inner cham- ber, and contained increased numbers of tightly packed cristae, some of which formed concentric whorls (Figure 3b). Myelin bodies were often seen in close proximity to these giant mitochondria (Figure 3c), and particulate glycogen was occasionally found within the matrix of abnormal mitochondria (Figure 3d). These mitochondrial abnormalities were present in at least 10% of the myofibers investigated. Tubular aggregates were never seen in type 1 myo- fibers nor any other abnormality detected.

Discussion

Tubular aggregates in myofibers were first de- scribed by Engel in 1964,12 who suggested they were of mitochondrial origin due to their staining characteristics for the mitochondrial enzymes NADH and SDH. He commented on the fact that they were seen only in type 2 skeletal muscle fibers and con- cluded that the type 1 fibers had an intrinsically different quality that did not permit such abnormal formations to occur. Since this observation, many myologists have reported tubular aggregate forma- tion in a plethora of conditions including periodic paralysis, [13][14][15] facioscapulohumeral dystrophy and aminoacidosis,16,17 myasthenia gravis,13,18 19 in- flammatory myopathies associated with a demyelinating neuropathy,20 subclinical alcoholic myopathy,2122 heroin addiction,23 chronic drug ingestion24 endocrine disorders,2526 malignant hyperthermia,27 and nonspecific muscle disorders as- sociated with pain and stiffness.2834 It has now Figure 1. Electron micrograph ofa type 2 myofiberfrom the TA muscle ofa 12-month-old apoE-deficient mouse. The closelypacked arrays oftubular aggregates can be seen in longitudinal and transverse section. Bar, 1 ,um. Inset a: Light micrograph ofsarcoplasmic inclusions in the TA musclefrom the same animal immunoreacted with 4G8 1-3amyloid antibody. The inclusions (arrows) are strongly positive and are seen only in type 2 myofibers. Bar, 10 ,um. Inset b: Light micrograph of sarcoplasmic inclusions in the TA muscle from the same animal after reaction for nonspecific esterase. Strong staining of the inclusions in type 2 myofibers is seen (arrows). Type 1 myofibers are not involved. Bar, 10 p.m. Figure 2. a: Electron micrograph ofa tubular aggregate in a type 2 myoftherfrom an 8-montb-old apoE-deficient mouse. The tubular structures contain an inner tubule (arrows) whereas other dilated vesicles contain moderately dense flocculent material (arrowheads). Bar, I jim. b: This aggregate is composed ofdilated tubules, some of which containi denseflocculent material (arrows). Bar, 1 jim. C: A portion ofa tubular aggregate containing tubules uith dense flocculent material, sexveral of uhbicb coninect to vessicular sacs (arrows). Bar, 1 jim. d: Tbin section ofa t)pe 1 myofiberfmm the soleus muscle ofa 12-month-old apoE-deficient mouse. An abniormal number of mitochondria can be seen in the subsarcolemmal region ofthisfiber. Bar, 1 jim. Myelin bodies (arrows) can be seen in close association with this mitochondrion. Bar, 1 ,um. d: A mitochondrion containing particulate glycogen (arrow) from the soleus muscle of a 12-month-old apoE-deficient mouse. Bar, 1 ,um. been established that tubular aggregates are derived from proliferation of sarcoplasmic reticulum of skeletal muscle fibers35'36 and not mitochondria12'31 or the transverse tubule system.15 Tubular aggre- gates have never been shown to exhibit any struc- tural association with mitochondria, which appear largely unaffected, and have consistently shown a lack of staining for SDH and a-glycerophos-phate1422303437 It has also been clearly shown that lanthanum staining of the T system34 failed to demonstrate any connection with these tubular ag- gregates. Although in the majority of cases reported in the literature tubular aggregates have been found in type 2 fibers only, they have occasionally been demonstrated in type 1 fibers.18'34 '38  In this study, the histochemical results obtained for the sarcoplasmic inclusions consisting of tubular aggregates in apoE-deficient mice were largely sim- ilar to those obtained by other workers on tubular aggregates of both human and animal origin. The only exception was the NADH-TR enzyme reaction, which was consistently negative for the sarcoplas- mic inclusions in apoE-deficient mice, whereas it is invariably positive in the published reports of similar inclusions. The reasons for this are unclear. Again, the present study supported the contention that tu- bular aggregates were derived from sarcoplasmic reticulum as inclusions were not reactive for the mitochondrial enzyme SDH but were strongly positive for nonspecific esterase, which has been shown to be concentrated in the sarcoplasmic reticulum of skeletal muscle. 39  It has been suggested that tubular aggregates represent a relatively nonspecific response of stri- ated muscle fibers to a variety of injurious agents.

Engel14 in 1970 postulated that the formation of these tubular structures was a means of "detoxifying excess endogenous or exogenous toxins or an at- tempt to correct metabolic deficits." Tubular aggre- gates from an autosomal dominantly inherited myop- athy accumulated calcium oxalate,40 and these authors concluded that the structures were equivalent to hypertrophied sarcoplasmic reticulum and theorized that they may be a reactive rather than degenerative change in response to increased cal- cium influx serving to prevent calcium accumulation that could lead to irreversible contraction and myo- necrosis.

Tubular aggregates have been induced in rat skeletal muscle by anoxia35 and cold injury41 and in mouse muscle after local injection of botulinum tox- 42 in. They have also been found to be prominent in aged male rats and were assumed to be related in some way to male sex hormones.43 Yashitoshi44 did not find tubular aggregates in castrated rats, al- though administration of male sex hormones resulted in the formation of tubular aggregates. Tubular ag- gregates were also described in type 2 fibers of 6-month-old male MRL Iprdlpr mice (a congenic mice substrain that spontaneously develops features sim- ilar to systemic lupus erythematosus). Kuncl45 ob- served that virtually all type 2 myofibers in male mice were found to be affected in these animals by 2 years. Castration of the mice prevented the expres- sion of tubular aggregates, and they suggested that the expression of tubular aggregates was limited largely to males in diverse acquired and hereditary human neuromuscular disorders. In our model of apoE-deficient mice, however, this male dominance was not evident as both male and females were affected equally. It has been shown immunocytochemically that apoE is concentrated in normal mice, rat, and human skeletal muscle at the neuromuscular junction.7 This may represent the portal of entry of the apoE-lipid complex into striated muscle fibers. To the best of our knowledge, there is no other lipoprotein that can adequately substitute for apoE with regard to providing cholesterol to peripheral tissues such as muscle. The only other lipoprotein that can deliver cholesterol to cells is apolipoprotein B100 but the ability of this apolipoprotein is restricted to the los-density lipoprotein particle, which is known to be in low concentra- tions in mice. Evidence to support apoE as the major delivery vehicle of cholesterol to cells is obtained from the work of two separate research groups in 1992,1 2 who demonstrated that apoE knockout mice have five times normal plasma cholesterol and de- veloped foam-cell-rich deposits in their proximal aor- tas by the age of 3 months. In the absence of apoE, failure of cholesterol and related lipids to be endo- cytosed may stimulate intrinsic synthesis of choles- terol and other lipids in the affected muscle fibers. Over time, the disturbed lipid metabolism in these fibers may result in the accumulation of phospholipids in the form of sarcoplasmic reticulum tubules in the type 2 fibers and enlarged mitochondria with tightly packed cristae in the type 1 fibers. If this hypothesis is correct, these changes will be mini- mized if affected animals are treated with apoE in- jection.

The reasons for the accumulation of 3-amyloid protein in type 2 fibers are unclear. 13-Amyloid pro- tein or amyloid precursor protein has been demon- strated in sporadic and hereditary inclusion body myositis as well as oculopharyngeal muscular dys- trophy.4647 In addition, 63-amyloid protein has been detected in soleus muscle of chloroquine-treated rats.48-50 The mechanism of f8-amyloid deposition and the putative role of the amyloid-associated pro- teins in the pathogenesis of amyloid deposition, how- ever, are unsolved.51-53 Because chloroquine is well known to induce rimmed vacuole myopathy in both humans and experimental animals, it has been sug- gested that the lysosomal pathway is involved in amyloid-13 formation.48,49,54-56 However, eosino- philic congophilic amyloid deposits have not been detected in other vacuolar myopathies including acid maltase deficiency and hypokalemic periodic paralysis.57 In the human, on the other hand, f3-amyloid protein and apoE6'58 persistently co-exist at the neuromuscular junction. It may be that in the apoEdeficient mice there is dysregulation of f3-amyloid protein production. If the latter occurs, then it is likely that the f3-amyloid protein will traffic through the Golgi complex and the cytoplasmic vacuolar sys- tem.59 As sarcoplasmic reticular proliferation occurs in the type 2 fibers of these animals, then this is likely to concentrate ,B-amyloid protein at the sites of sarcotubular aggregation. Immunoelectron microscopic studies are currently underway to investigate the morphological association of the ,B-amyloid protein with elements of the sarcoplasmic reticulum.

Acknowledgments

We acknowledge the skillful technical assistance of Mr. Ian Thomson from the Department of Neuropa- thology, Royal Perth Hospital, Western Australia for the histochemistry reported in this manuscript.

Figure 33Figure3. a: An abnormally large mitochondrion in a type lfiberfrom the soleus muscle ofa 12-month-old apoF-deficient mouse. The mitochondrion contains increase-d numbers of dense, tightly packed cristae. Bar, 1 p.m. b: Another abnormally large mitochondrion from the same animal. The cristae are seen to form concentric uwhirls. Bar, 1 A.m. C: A large mitochondrion from the soleus muscle of a 10-month-old apoE-deficient mouse.

Table

1

. Quantitative Assessment of Inclusions in Type 2 Myofibers from the Tibialis Anterior Muscle , or xylene after being stained. Abnormalities were not observed in the muscles of age-and sex- matched control animals.of Apo-E-Deficient MiceAge of animalsPercentage of myofibers(months)containing inclusions246813.4 + 4.31022.38 + 7.321233.99 + 8.851440.42 ± 5.9alcohol

Table 2 .2Histochemical Profile of Type 2 Skeletal MuscleFiber InclusionsReactionHistochemistryPeriodic acid SchiffPeriodic acid Schiff with diastaseNonspecific esterase Cytochrome oxidase+GomoriAdenylate deaminaseNADH-TRAcid phosphataseAlkaline phosphataseSDHATPase (pH 4.3, 4.6, 9.5)Oil-red 0von KossaFluorescent Congo red techniqueUbiquitin f3-Amyloid (4G8 antibody)+

