Increase of nitric oxide synthases and nitrotyrosine in inclusion-body myositis

Introduction

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (IBM) is the most common progressive muscle disease in patients aged 50 years and older, and it leads to severe disability (reviewed in Ref. 1). It is characterized by proximal and distal limb-muscle weakness, thinning of the forearms, dysphagia and male predominance. There is no successful treatment. 1 Diagnostic pathological features of the IBM muscle biopsy include vacuolated muscle fibers and various degrees of inflammation on Engel-Gomori trichrome staining; 1 congophilia within the vacuoles, and occasionally within the vacuole-free cytoplasm; 1 cytoplasmic inclusions composed of 15-21 nm diameter paired-helical filaments (PHFs), which can be identified by electron microscopy 2 or using antibodies against phosphorylated tau; 3 ragged-red muscle fibers containing mitochondria with paracrystalline inclusions; 4 and cytochrome c-oxidase-negative segments of muscle fibers. 4 In addition to congophilia and tau-containing PHFs, there are other Alzheimer-like features in IBM abnormal muscle fibers, including accumulation of ␤-amyloid, 5 and of several other 'Alzheimercharacteristic' proteins (reviewed in Ref. 1). ␤-Amyloid precursor protein and its mRNA, and cellular prion protein and its mRNA, also accumulate in IBM vacuolated muscle fibers. [6][7][8] Furthermore, we have recently demonstrated abnormal accumulations of copper-zinc superoxide dismutase (SOD1) and SOD1-mRNA. 9 Increased generation of SOD1 may indicate an attempted protective response of a cell to 'oxidative stress'. Increased nitric oxide (NO) combines rapidly with superoxide to form the powerful oxidizing agent peroxynitrite, which in turn can nitrate tyrosine groups of proteins (reviewed in Refs 10,11). We now report that nitrotyrosine, a marker of such excessive oxidative activity, 10,11 accumulates in abnormal muscle fibers of IBM, along with accumulations of neuronal (n) and inducible (i) forms of nitric oxide synthase (NOS). Our study provides the first evidence that NO-initiated oxidative stress may play a pathogenic role in human muscle disease.

Materials and Methods

Patients: We studied diagnostic muscle biopsies obtained with informed consent from 30 patients with the following diagnoses: IBM (12), polymyositis (5), morphologically non-specific myopathy (4), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (3) and dermatomyositis (1), and biopsies of normal muscle (5). Diagnosis of all patients was based on clinical and laboratory studies, including 18-reaction histochemistry of the muscle biopsy. 12 All IBM patients had classic PHFs by electron microscopy and by SMI-31 immunoreactivity, 3 and had congo-red positively identified by the enhancement technique 1 .

Light microscopy immunocytochemistry: Immunocytochemical stainings were performed on 10 m unfixed transverse sections of fresh-frozen muscle biopsies, using peroxidase-antiperoxidase and fluorescence methods, as described prevously. 2,3,5,6 The antibodies used were mouse monoclonal antibody against human nNOS (lot 4, Transduction Laboratories, Lexington, KY), diluted 1:10; rabbit polyclonal antiserum against human nNOS (lot 4, Transduction Laboratories), diluted 1:100, and from Alexis Laboratory, San Diego, CA, lot L00476, diluted 1:500; mouse monoclonal antibody against human iNOS, (lot 12, Transduction Laboratories), diluted 1:10; rabbit polyclonal antiserum iNOS (lot 7, Transduction Laboratories, and lot 65023, Alexis Laboratory), diluted 1:100 and 1:500 respectively; mouse monoclonal antibody against nitrotyrosine (gift from Dr J.S. Beckman), diluted 1:10; and rabbit polyclonal antiserum against nitrotyrosine (gift from Dr J.S. Beckman and lot 14693, purchased form Upstate Biotechnologies, Inc. Lake Placid, NY), both diluted 1:20. Antibodies against n-and i-NOS were shown to be isoform-specific by the suppliers and subsequently confirmed by others. 13 Incubations were performed at 4°C; for 24 h with the primary and polyclonal antibodies and for 48-72 h with primary monoclonal antibodies.

Clinical Neuroscience and Neuropathology

Controls for staining specificity were omission of the primary antibody or its replacement with normal rabbit serum and preabsorption of primary polyclonal antiserum against nitrotyrosine with purified nitrotyrosine (gift from Dr J.S. Beckman). To block non-specific binding of antibody to F C receptors, sections were preincubated with 1:10 diluted normal goat serum, as described previously. 2,3,5,6 Double immunofluorescence using polyclonal antiserum against either nNOS, iNOS or nitrotyrosine, combined with a monoclonal antibody SMI-31 recognizing phosphorylated tau (Sternberger's Laboratory, MD), diluted 1:500, 3 was performed using Texas-red and fluorescein isothiocyanatelabeled secondary antisera, as described previously. 2,5,6 Macrophages were identified with the monoclonal antibody Ber-MAC 3 (Dako, Carpenteria, CA), and regenerating muscle fibers were identified with a monoclonal antibody against desmin (Zymed, So. San Francisco, CA), as described previously. 7 Immuno-electronmicroscopy: This was performed on 10 m unfixed frozen-sections adhered to the bottom of 35 mm Petri dishes, as described previously. 2,3,5,6 In brief, after incubation in a given primary antibody, sections were incubated in either gold-or horse radish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antisera and processed for electron microscopy as described previously. 2,3,5,6 The embedded section in the dish was viewed under phase-contrast microscopy. Vacuolated muscle fibers were identified, marked, and 1 mm diameter cores drilled out. 2,3,5,6 From the cores, each containing at least one vacuolated muscle fiber, thin sections were cut and examined by electron microscopy, either without counterstaining for horse radish peroxidase reactions or following counterstaining with uranyl acetate and lead citrate for the gold label.

Results

Light microscopy immunocytochemistry: About 70-80% of vacuolated muscle fibers in all IBM patients were immunoreactive with antibodies against nNOS, iNOS and nitrotyrosine, all of which gave the same results, even though the intensity of the immunoreactivity varied slightly among the various antibodies. Immunoreactivity achieved with all antibodies had the form of well-defined darkly positive inclusions, either within the vacuoles or in the vacuole-free cytoplasm. Most of the immunoreactive deposits had a 'squiggly' or plaque-like appearance (Fig. 1). The cytoplasm of most of those fibers did not have diffusely increased immunoreactivity.

NOS and nitrotyrosine immunoreactivities colocalized with SMI-31 immunoreactivity in 80-90% of the SMI-31-positive muscle fibers (Fig. 2). When the primary antibody was omitted or replaced by a normal rabbit serum, the immunoreactions did not take place. Preabsorption of anti-nitrotyrosine antibody with purified nitrotyrosine abolished or markedly diminished the staining.

Control muscle biopsies: None of the control biopsies contained NOS or nitrotyrosine-positive inclusions characteristic of the IBM vacuolated muscle fibers. Immunoreactivity with antibodies against iNOS was stronger in type-I than type-II muscle fibers in all biopsies, including IBM. Both muscle fiber types were very minimally and equally stained with antibodies against nNOS, but were negative with antibody against nitrotyrosine. The postsynaptic domain of the neuromuscular junctions had increased immunoreactivities with antibodies against nNOS and iNOS, but not with the antibodies against nitrotyrosine (not shown). There was no discernable sarcolemmal staining of the muscle fibers with any of the antibodies.

In the cytoplasm of regenerating muscle fibers in various muscle diseases, including the IBMs, polymyositis, and other myopathies, nNOS and iNOS immunoreactivity was moderately increased diffusely (not shown), whereas nitrotyrosine immunoreactivity was not present in regenerating muscle fibers.

Macrophages invading muscle fibers, presumably activated macrophages, showed increased immunoreactivity with antibodies against iNOS, but not with antibodies against nNOS (not shown). Nitrotyrosine immunoreactivity was present only in a very small subset of infiltrating macrophages (not shown). Immuno-electronmicroscopy: In IBM muscle, ultrastructural immunoreactivities with all three antibodies were remarkably similar. They were localized mainly to the PHFs (Fig. 3). Also, within the vacuoles, amorphous and floccular material, either in close proximity to the PHFs or at a further distance, contained variably strong immunoreactivity with antibodies against both NOS's and nitrotyrosine (Fig. 3). The normal parts of the muscle fiber adjacent to the vacuoles were not immunoreactive.

Discussion and Conclusion

Three forms of human NOS, neuronal, inducible, and endothelial, have been cloned and are encoded by different genes on chromosomes 12, 17 and 7, respectively (reviewed in Refs 14-16). Neuronal (nNOS) and endothelial-NOS are constitutive, and are stimulated mainly by intracellular Ca 2+ via calmodulin. [14][15][16] Even though their activation does not require new enzyme synthesis, new synthesis of nNOS has been demonstrated under certain  (E-G) iNOS. (E) Low power electron micrograph of peroxidase reaction demonstrating dark reaction product covering exclusively a large bundle of PHFs (above), whereas the adjacent myofibrillar portion of the myofiber (below) and a few lipid droplets among PHFs are not immunostained. (F-H) Gold immunoelectronmicroscopy using 10 nm gold particles. In (F) gold particles exclusively label PHFs, whereas adjacent mitochondria and a portion of the muscle fiber myofibrils (at bottom) are not labeled. (G,H) Labeling of amorphous (G) and membranes (H) structures. (I-L) Nitrotyrosine (NT). (I,J) Peroxidase reaction demonstrating dark reaction product covering PHFs completely (I, above; J, all). The adjacent myofibrillar portion of the myofiber in (I) (below) is not immunoreactive. (K,L) Gold immuno-electronmicroscopy using circumstances (reviewed in Ref. 16). The iNOS, present especially in activated macrophages, can also be induced in various other cell. 14,15 iNOS is transcriptionally regulated. 14,15 Its increased synthesis can be stimulated by cytokines, inflammation and other pathologic processes. 14,15 NO, a short-lived reactive gas, is formed by NOS directly from the guanidino nitrogen of L-arginine (reviewed in Ref. 16). NO is considered to be an intercellular and intracellular messenger with many diverse functions: playing a role in vasodilation; mediating anti-microbial toxicity of macrophages; serving as an inter-neuronal messenger; and possibly inducing transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation of genes (reviewed in Refs 15,16). Excessive production of NO is postulated to play an important role in various diseases, including neurodegenerative, inflammatory and immunological processes. 14,16 The mechanisms by which NO may contribute to the pathogenesis of various diseases are not well understood, but one is thought to involve its ability to react with superoxide anion to form the highly reactive, extremely toxic molecule peroxynitrite (reviewed in Refs 10,11). Peroxynitrite, which is much more toxic than nitric oxide itself, can -by nitrating phenol rings (e.g. in tyrosines of proteins), hydroxylating aromatic rings, and oxidizing lipids and proteins, as well as modifying DNA 10,11,16 adversely influence various cellular organelles, including mitochondria. 10,11,16 Peroxynitrite induces nitration of tyrosines in proteins, forming a stable compound 3-nitrotyrosine (nitrotyrosine). 10,11 Nitration of proteins can disturb their functions and result in various pathological processes. 10,11 For example, nitration of proteins has recently been postulated to play a role in neuron degeneration of Alzheimer's disease 17 and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. 18 In contrast to many human tissues in which functions of NOS and NO have been extensively studied, their role in normal and diseased human skeletal muscle is largely unknown. Induction of iNOS mRNA by cytokines has been demonstrated in a clonal cell line of mouse muscle. 19 Homogenates of human skeletal muscle contain mRNA of nNOS. 20 In fixed sections of frozen human muscle biopsies, nNOS has been reported (but not yet confirmed) to be co-localized at the sarcolemma with dystrophin and to be decreased in dystrophin-deficient Duchenne muscular dystrophy. 21 Our studies appear to be the first to demonstrate increased amounts of nNOS, iNOS and nitrotyrosine in abnormal human muscle. The antibodies we used against nNOS and iNOS are considered to be isoform-specific, and certainly their patterns of immunoreactivity differed regarding invading macrophages (high iNOS, no nNOS), and type-I muscle fibers (moderately high iNOS, very low nNOS).

Nitric oxide and inclusion body myositis

The mechanisms leading to increased accumulation of nNOS and iNOS in IBM remain to be elucidated. The iNOS immunoreactive inclusions in IBM vacuolated muscle fibers probably do not reflect the presence of macrophages, because our previous 6 and present studies, using double-labeling with a macrophage-specific marker (not shown), demonstrated that most of the IBM vacuolated muscle fibers did not contain invading macrophages. It is possible that ␤-amyloid protein, which accumulates abnormally in IBM vacuolated muscle fibers, 5 is responsible for the increase of NOS in those fibers, since such a mechanism was reported to occur in other cells. 22 It is also possible that, as in the mouse-muscle clonal cell line, 19 cytokines induce transcription of iNOS in IBM, because our most recent studies demonstrate that IBM vacuolated muscle fibers contain increased accumulation of interleukin 1␤, 1␣ and 6 (Haginoya and Askanas, unpublished observations). A provocative role of the putative 'IBM-virus' 1 in the accumulation of NOS remains speculative.

Preliminary in situ hybridization studies (in progress) using a cDNA probe for iNOS suggest increased iNOS-mRNA in IBM vacuolated muscle fibers. Those studies, and others using cDNA for nNOS, should be able to determine whether the abnormal accumulation of nNOS and iNOS in IBM vacuolated muscle fibers may result from their locally increased mRNAs, which could be attributable to increased transcription or mRNA stabilization (stabilizing mRNA is considered a major control point regulating NOS 15 ).

Even though we do not know whether all the immunoreactive NOS in all the subcellular sites is enzymatically active, the presence of nitrotyrosine in IBM vacuolated muscle fibers allows the hypothesis that abnormal accumulation of NOS in IBM leads to overproduction of NO and subsequently to the NO-induced oxidative stress. This mechanism may contribute to the muscle degeneration of IBM, including loss of cytochrome-c oxidase and structural abnormalities of mitochondria, which are known to be initiated by NO. 23 The possible role of SOD1 in tyrosine nitration in IBM is not yet established. The increase of SOD1 in IBM vacuolated muscle fibers 9 may have risen independently of NO mechanisms, or it initially may have been an attempted protective response to decrease ambient superoxide and the consequent formation of peroxynitrite. In conditions of overwhelming amounts of NO and peroxynitrate, SOD1 can actually catalyse nitration to facilitate nitrotyrosine production. 11 Nitric oxide and inclusion body myositis The proteins nitrated in IBM are not yet known. One possibility is tau protein, since both nitrotyrosine and phosphorylated tau are present in IBM PHFs. 1,3,24 Since IBM PHFs are congophilic, 24 we raise the possibility that nitration of certain proteins might facilitate their formation into the congophilic amyloid. Because nitration of a protein can make it antigenic, 11 such a neoantigenicity might play a role in the immune response typical of IBM muscle.

The experimental transfer of the ␤-amyloid precursor protein gene into normal cultured human muscle induces a partial IBM phenotype, including mitochondrial abnormalities, cytochrome-c oxidase deficiency and increase of SOD1. 9,25 Accordingly, this experimental model might be useful for studying possible mechanisms leading to oxidative damage in human muscle.

In both IBM and Alzheimer's disease 17 nitrotyrosine is accumulated on similar subcellular structures. It is therefore possible that similar pathologic mechanisms, taking place in an aging cellular milieu, lead to the demonstrating tyrosine nitration (oxidative stress) in both. Thus, molecular studies of the biopsied IBM muscle might also shed light on mechanisms relevant to Alzheimer's disease.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS:We are very grateful to Dr Joseph Beckman for helpful discussions and the generous gift of his antibodies. Supported in part by grants from the National Institutes of Health, Muscular Dystrophy Association, Sheldon Katz ALS Research Fund, and Helen Lewis Research Fund. C.C.Y. is supported by the National Taiwan University Hospital. Maggie Baburyan provided excellent photographic assistance.

General Summary

Nitric oxide, a short-lived diffusible gas, is synthesized by nitric oxide synthases (NOS's). Three forms of human NOS have been identified, neuronal, inducible, and endothelial; they are encoded by different genes located on different chromosomes. Physiological and pathological roles of the NOS isoforms and of their product nitric oxide are receiving increased attention in the neurosciences. Nitrotyrosine is a product of nitric oxide-induced oxidative stress, a process that has been postulated to play a role in various neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease. Whether nitric oxide-induced oxidative stress plays a role in the pathogenesis of human muscle diseases is not known.

We report abnormal accumulation of neuronal and inducible NOS's and of nitrotyrosine in muscle biopsies of patients with inclusion body myositis, which is the most common muscle disease of older people.

Our studies are the first to demonstrate that nitrotyrosine, presumably reflecting nitric oxide-induced oxidative stress, occurs in diseased human muscle, and in the same foci as increased neuronal and inducible forms of NOS. Because both inclusion body myositis and Alzheimer's disease are associated with aging, and in both diseases nitrotyrosine is located on similar pathological structures within the affected cells, similar abnormal cellular mechanisms may be responsible for nitric oxide-induced pathologic oxidation (stress) in both diseases. Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/neuroreport by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hC ywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8KKGKV0Ymy+78= on 03/08/2023

©Rapid Science Publishers Vol 8 No 1 20 December 1996 153 TO investigate the possible role of nitric oxide (NO)induced 'oxidative stress' in the pathogenesis of inclusion-body myositis (IBM), we immunostained muscle biopsies of 12 patients with IBM with isoformspecific antibodies against the neuronal and inducible forms of nitric oxide synthase and with antibodies against nitrotyrosine. Between 70 and 80% of IBM vacuolated muscle fibers contained inclusions strongly immunoreactive with all three antibodies, which by immuno-electronmicroscopy co-localized mainly to cytoplasmic paired-helical filaments, and also to amorphous structures and floccular material. Excess intracellular NO can combine with superoxide to produce highly reactive peroxynitrite, which can nitrate tyrosines of proteins. The presence of nitrotyrosine is indicative of NO-induced 'oxidative stress'. Our data suggest that this mechanism may play a pathogenic role in IBM.

in the IBM and control biopsies, presumably non-activated resident macrophages, were negative with all antibodies.

Vol 8 1568FIG. 1. Light microscopic immunocytochemistry of inclusion body myositis (IBM) muscle biopsies, peroxidase-antiperoxidase reaction. (A,B) Neuronal NOS (nNOS); (C,D) inducible NOS (iNOS); (E,F) nitrotyrosine (NT). m = monoclonal antibody; p = polyclonal antibody. With all antibodies, very strongly immunoreactive accumulations of various sizes are present either within the vacuoles or in the vacuolefree cytoplasm of abnormal muscle fibers. The surrounding normal muscle fibers show no immunoreactive accumulations, but (D) shows a difference between fiber types with the iNOS antibody (the type-I fibers are darker). Magnification: ϫ1250 (A,B,C,E,F); ϫ600 (D).

Vol 88No 1 20 December 1996 157 Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/neuroreport by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hC

