The therapeutic dilemma of inclusion body myositis

Inclusion body lmyositis (IBM) has unique clinical, histologic, and therapeutic features that distinguish it from other inflammatory myopathies, particularly polymyositis and dermatomyositis. 1-3 Although similar but noninflammatory familial forms are recognized, this editorial is concerned with only the sporadic form of the disease. IBM patients develop slowly progressive weakness, usually after the age of 50. The slow evolution of the disease is one of the primary reasons for the delay in diagnosis, which averages approximately 6 years from the onset of sympt0rns.l Men are much more commonly affected than women. The clinical hallmark of IBM is early weakness and atrophy of the quadriceps, wrist and finger flexors, and ankle dorsiflexors. Severe weakness in these muscle groups is so characteristic of IBM, that even if the classic histologic findings are not present on muscle biopsy, a presumptive diagnosis of "possible" IBM should be considered.lS2 Classic light microscopy features are endomysial inflammation with invasion of non-necrotic muscle fibers, eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusions, and rimmed vacuoles within the muscle fibers that contain amyloid deposit^.^ Electron microscopy reveals an accumulation of cytoplasmic and intranuclear 15to 21-nm tubofilaments. The inflammatory response consists of macrophages and CDS+ cytotoxic/suppressor T lymphocytes and is often the most prominent initial histologic finding.5 The other pathologic features may not be identified on the initial muscle biopsy, often necessitating second or third biopsy for confirmation.

Despite the inflammatory response in IBM, the disease is typically refractory to immunosuppressive therapy. This lack of response to immunosuppressive treatment distinguishes IBM from dermatomyositis, and polymyositis. When IBM patients are placed on prednisone therapy, strength continues to deteriorate despite a decrease in serum creatine kinase levels and the suppression of inflammation on repeat muscle biopsy.'j In addition, although inflammation decreases, the number of fibers with vacuoles and amyloid deposits increases over time.6 The addition of other immunosuppressive drugs, such as azathioprine and methotrexate, does not improve the poor therapeutic response. These observations suggest

that IBM is a degenerative rather than an autoimmune inflammatory myopathy and that the inflammation may be a secondary response. The accumulation of "Alzheimer-characteristic" proteins in vacuolated muscle fibers (such as p-amyloid and paired helical filament, e.g. tau) is additional indirect evidence to support the degenerative hypothesis.2

Intravenous gamma globulin (IVIG) is widely used t o treat autoimmune neuromuscular disease. The benefit of IVIG has been most clearly shown for autoimmune inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropat h i e ~. ~

In addition, Dalakas et a1.8 have shown a beneficial effect of IVIG in a placebo-controlled study of dermatomyositis. Whether IVIG is beneficial in the treatment of IBM is still debated. Two previous, small noncontrolled studies came to different conclusions on this point. Soueidan and Dalakas9 showed a slight improvement in muscle strength in three of four patients treated with IVIG. Subsequently, Amato et a1.l0 were unable to document any significant clinical improvement in nine IBM patients treated with IVIG. In this issue of Neurology,  report the results of a placebo-controlled, double-blind study of IVIG in IBM.ll Nineteen patients were entered into this study, nine of whom were randomized to receive IVIG and 10 placebo. Patients received three infusions at monthly intervals, followed by a 1-month washout and a 3-month crossover phase. As in the two prior nonblinded studies, the primary efficacy measurement was manual muscle strength testing using an expanded MRC (Medical Research Council) scale. The researchers found that IVIG produced an increase in the combined MRC score compared with placebo, but this finding did not reach statistical significance. The secondary efficacy measurements included maximum voluntary isometric contraction (MVIC), quantitative swallowing function by ultrasound, and a "limb-by-limb" analysis of MRC scores. The MVIC scores again showed a trend toward improvement in the IVIG-treated patients, but this did not reach statistical significance. Both the swallowing studies and a complicated lower extremity limbby-limb MRC score subanalysis showed a statistically significant improvement with IVIG therapy. A From the Department of Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX. Copyright 0 1997 by the American Academy of Neurology 567 number of patients interviewed at the conclusion of the study believed that they had improved with IVIG therapy. Nevertheless, statistical significance was not achieved for the primary outcome measurement; therefore, this has to be considered a negative study.

The authors should be applauded for performing the first placebo-controlled, double-blind therapeutic trial in IBM. Certainly, further placebo-controlled trials for IBM need to be pursued, which unfortunately may be hampered by several practical issues. IBM is an uncommon disease, and most centers will have difficulty enrolling the number of patients required to reach statistical power for a placebocontrolled trial, requiring multicenter studies. In addition, because most of the standard immunosuppressive drugs have already been tried in IBM to no avail, we now need to explore more novel forms of immunosuppressive therapy. However, it is difficult to enlist the interest of pharmaceutical companies to support clinical trials for this uncommon disease.

There is a major dilemma with therapeutic trials for IBM. If IBM is not a primary autoimmune inflammatory myopathy, it is unlikely that immunosuppressive agents will improve strength or function. Slowing of the rate of deterioration or stabilization of strength may be the goal. Treating IBM with immunosuppressive drugs may thus be analogous t o treating Duchenne muscular dystrophy with prednisone.12 Therefore, if our goal in IBM is to slow or prevent disease progression rather than improve muscle strength, different trial designs need to be adopted. None of the IVIG studies in IBM were designed to answer this question. To show slowing or stabilization, trials need to be longer, 6 months at a minimum but possibly 12 or 24 months. Quantitative muscle strength assessment using MVIC should be the primary measurement of efficacy. Most importantly, we need to have accurate natural history data on the rate of muscle strength deterioration in IBM. This is crucial to determine how many patients need to be studied to obtain adequate power. Rose et all3 have begun to explore this issue and have shown that based on the slow rate of deterioration of quantitative strength measurements in IBM, studies will most likely have to be in excess of 6 months to show stabilization and will require more than 30 patients in each treatment group. Finally, an alternative class of drugs such as trophic factors may be a sensible choice.

IVIG may not be the therapeutic answer for patients with IBM. Two small noncontrolled studies and a larger controlled study of IVIG in IBM have failed to show a dramatic increase in strength in treated patients. Therefore, at this time, it is difficult to justify the use of an expensive therapy such as IVIG for this disease. Even if IVIG occasionally produces a modest benefit, existing data provide no way to predict which patients will respond. Moreover, we still do not know whether long-term use of IVIG or other immunosuppressive agents slows down the progression of this disease. While we are awaiting further trials and newer potential drug therapies for IBM, the therapeutic dilemma of when to institute IVIG treatment and for how long will continue t o challenge physicians who care for patients with IBM.

Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr. Richard Barohn, Department of Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 78235-8897.

