Treatment of inclusion-body myositis with IVIg: A double-blind, placebo-controlled study

We randomized 19 patients with inclusion-body myositis (IBM) to a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study using monthly infusions of 2 g k g intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) or placebo for 3 months. Patients crossed over to the alternate treatment after a washout period. We evaluated responses a t baseline and at the end of each treatment period using expanded (0-10) MRC scales, the Maximum Voluntary Isometric Contraction (MVIC) method, symptom and disability scores, and quantitative swallowing studies. We calculated the differences in scores between IVIg and placebo from baseline to end of treatment. Of the 19 patients, 9 (mean age, 61.2 years; mean disease duration, 5.6 years) were randomized to IVIg and 10 (mean age, 66.1 years; mean disease duration, 7.4 years) to placebo. During IVIg the patients gained a mean of 4.2 (-16 to +39.8) MRC points, and during placebo lost 2.7 (-10 to +8) points ( p < 0.1). These gains were not significant. Similar results were obtained with the MRC and MVIC scores when the patients crossed to the alternate treatment. Six patients had a functionally important improvement by more than 10 MRC points that declined when crossed over to placebo. Limb-by-limb analysis demonstrated that during IVIg the muscle strength in 39% of the lower extremity limbs significantly increased compared with placebo ( p < 0.051, while a simultaneous decrease in 28% of other limbs was detected. The clinical importance of these minor gains is unclear. The duration of swallowing functions measured in seconds with ultrasound improved statistically in the IVIg-randomized patients ( p < 0.05) compared with placebo. Although the study did not establish efficacy of IVIg, possibly because of the small sample size, the drug induced functionally important improvement in 6 (28%) of the 19 patients. Whether the modest gains noted in certain muscle groups justify the high cost of trying IVIg in IBM patients a t a given stage of the disease remains unclear.

Inclusion-body myositis (IBM), the most common acquired inflammatory muscle disease occurring above the age of 50 y e a r ~, l -~ is characterized by slowly progressive muscle weakness and atrophy affecting, often asymmetrically, proximal and distal muscle groups. Dysphagia is also frequent, occurring in at least 60% of patient^.^ Although the disease is progressive, data on natural history and rate of progression of the involved muscle groups are not available.

IBM has various immunopathologic similarities with polymyositis, including intense endomysial inflammation consisting of CD8+ cytotoxic T cells that invade MHC-I-class-expressing, non-necrotic, muscle fibers,3~~-~ and frequent association with other autoimmune conditions.R In contrast to polymyositis, IBM is notoriously resistant to therapies and is often suspected, retrospectively, when patients diagnosed with polymyositis have failed treatment with immunosuppressive medications such as methotrexate, prednisone, or azathioprine. The resistance to therapy along with the intramuscular deposition of P-amyloid and amyloid-related proteins have raised the possibility that IBM may be a neurodegenerative d i ~e a s e . ~ High-dose intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) is an immunomodulating drug that has helped patients with therapy-resistant polymyositis.lO In addition, IVIg has improved some patients with IBM in one of two reported open-label, small, uncontrolled studies.11J2 These observations prompted us to perform the present double-blind, placebo-controlled study with an increase in muscle strength as the primary end-point. The study did not address any change in disease progression.

Methods. Patients. Twenty-two patients fulfilling the diagnostic criteria for IBM1-3 were referred to the National Institutes of Health (NIH) for therapeutic studies during the period 1992-1994. Eligible patients had active disease characterized by progressive muscle weakness, an impaired ability to perform fully the activities of daily living (ADL), and absence of another systemic illness. Immediately before enrollment, all patients had a diagnostic muscle biopsy. Nineteen of the patients had been treated previously with high-dose prednisone or therapeutic doses of another immunosuppressant (methotrexate, azathioprine) for a t least 4 to 6 months. During the study period, only three patients were receiving low to moderate-dose pred-nisone. Patients with coronary artery disease, IgA deficiency, or kidney dysfunction were excluded, as were bedridden patients. The protocol was approved by the institutional review board of the NINDS, and the patients, who gave their written informed consent, were admitted to the Clinical Center at the NIH.

The protocol, a double-blind, placebocontrolled design, specified the administration of one infusion of IVIg or placebo consisting of dextrose in halfnormal saline once per month for 3 months. The patients were assigned to receive IVIg or placebo by a blockrandomization procedure designed to ensure groups balanced for disease severity. After a washout period of at least 1 month, the patients had the option of crossing over to the alternative therapy for another 3 months. All patients, including those who did not cross over, were followed for up to 3 months after the completion of their infusions. The randomization code was not broken until all the patients completed the study and the results were analyzed. The principal investigator, the physicians, nurses, physical therapists, and statistician were unaware of which treatment was administered. Randomization was performed at the pharmacy, and the bottle of IVIg or placebo, wrapped in aluminum foil, was then brought to the patient's room, as described.I3 The whole intravenous set was covered by a n opaque plastic bag so that any possible fluid turbidity or frothing would not be evident to the investigators or patients. Clinical side effects were recorded by the neurologist assigned to each patient, or were communicated by the patients directly to their assigned neurologist or to the nurse coordinator.

Before entering the study, each patient had a physical examination and a diagnostic muscle biopsy. Before and after each infusion and monthly thereafter, routine blood chemistry, complete blood count, and serum muscle enzymes were determined.

The dose of IVIg was 2 g per kg of body weight divided into two daily doses of 1 g per kilogram each, given slowly less than 200 mlfh, a s described.13 In the three patients receiving prednisone, the dose remained unchanged during and for 2 to 3 months before and after the study. The patients were encouraged to continue their routine daily activities while a t home.

Changes in skeletal muscle strength were assessed with the modified (expanded) Medical Research Council (MRC) scale,14 which was the primary outcome measure, and with the Maximum Voluntary Isometric Contraction (MVIC) method.15 The MVIC was performed by a trained nurse who examined the following muscle groups: shoulder abduction; forearm flexion and extension; hip flexion; leg extension and flexion; and foot extensors. Changes in the strength of bulbar muscles were examined with ultrasound swallowing.16 The manual muscle strength testing was performed on a total of 26 proximal and distal muscle groups bilaterally. The following muscle groups were tested on each side: deltoid; biceps brachii; triceps brachii; brachioradialis; wrist extensors; wrist flexors; iliopsoas; gluteus maximus; quadriceps femoris; hamstrings; and neck, finger, and foot extensors and flexors. The responses were rated according to the expanded MRC scale (in which 0 is the lowest score and 10 the highest). The primary outcome measure was a change in the total MRC scores from baseline between IVIg and Study design.

Assessments.

placebo. Each patient was evaluated throughout the study by the same neurologist, assigned to the patient from the outset of the study (E.S., E.C., K.S.). The principal investigator (M.C.D.) was not one of the evaluators. The net differences in the MRC scores from baseline to the end of 3 months of treatment were compared between the patients randomized to the two treatment groups for each period. The crossover data were analyzed separately, comparing the baseline scores after the washout period to the end of the %month treatment.

As a secondary measure of efficacy, changes in the total MVIC scores (megascores) were examined in two extremities (arm and leg), and the net effect was compared between the two groups.

Statistical analysis. Data were analyzed using t tests within the two-period crossover design. This included a three-stage procedure for testing carryover and period effects adjusted for baseline differences as described by Jones and Kenward.17 A number of post hoc analyses were also conducted to explore the possibility of a selective effect of treatment; adjustments for multiple comparisons were not used for these investigations.

The swallowing function was measured a t baseline, at the end of the first 3 months of treatment, and a t the end of the second phase. Because the ultrasound provides a n objective quantitative and accurate measure of swallowing, the assessment was based on the ultrasound data. Comparison between the two groups was examined using Student's t test.

Because the muscle groups in IBM are asymmetrically affected, a post hoc limb-by-limb analysis was performed to determine whether improvement was more significant in muscles of one limb compared with another, or whether during the study some muscles in the same patient improved while others worsened. Changes in scores per limb from baseline to the end of the 3-month treatment were examined separately for the upper and lower extremities.

At the end of the study and prior to breaking the code, the patients were asked to provide their own assessment about therapy and (a) speculate as to which phase they received  - Before entering the data for analysis and breaking the code, a decision was made not to analyze three muscle groups-the neck, finger, and foot extensors and flexors-because data was not always available, especially in the neck, and the involvement of the fingers was at times severe and their assessment inconsistent. Thus, a total of 10 muscle groups was entered and analyzed in every patient. The total maximal MRC score for the analyzed muscles was 200.

The 10 patients randomized to placebo lost a mean of 2.7 MRC points (-10 to +8) during the 3-month period. In contrast, the nine patients randomized to IVIg gained a mean 4.2 (-16 to +39.8) MRC points (Figure 1). The difference in strength gains, however, between the two groups was not significant. The trend toward gaining strength during IVIg and losing strength during placebo was also noted during the crossover period (figure 2, A and  B). The placebo group, when crossed to IVIg, gained 5.7 points (-7 to + 19) (figure 2A), whereas the IVIg group lost 4.5 (-19 to +9) points when crossed over to placebo (figure 2B). The differences in the strength gains between the two groups, however, were again not significant. For each patient, the actual change in the total MRC scores is shown in figure 3.

Although the study did not reach significance, possibly because of the small sample size, six patients (depicted in figures 1 and 2) improved by more than 10 points. In previous studies, a change by more than two grades in the nonexpanded MRC scale was essential to document a difference from a placebo effect.18 On this basis, a 10-point improvement in the expanded MRC scale was arbitrarily considered functionally analogous to the two MRC grades.

The MVIC scores, which were a secondary outcome, were obtained in 11 patients. In order to avoid a learning effect occurring during the first phase of the study in both the tester and the patients, we analyzed the MVIC data, before breaking the code, only for the second phase of the study. As shown Changes in strength using MRC scores.

Changes in strength using MVIC scores. in figure 4, the MVIC scores (megascores) obtained during the second period confirmed the trend obtained with the MRC scores, demonstrating a mean gain of 19.6 pounds (-9 to +45.5) in the IVIg group compared to 7.2 pounds (-18 to +49) in the placebo group. This difference was not statistically significant. Possible residual effect was noted in two patients who continued to improve during the placebo period after having demonstrated strength gains with IVIg during the first phase.

Limb-by-limb analysis. In a retrospective (post hoc) limb-by-limb analysis, we examined whether there was a 3-point difference in the limbs of the upper and lower extremities. The three-point difference was based on the observation noted above that during the placebo phase the patients lost a mean of 2.7 points. Furthermore, assuming that a 10-point difference in the MRC global score corresponded to some functional improvement as stated earlier, we hypothesized that a n improvement per limb would be captured if a minimum of a 3-point change had occurred. We found no changes between placebo or IVIg in the upper-extremity muscles (table 1). In the lower extremities, however, a statistically significant improvement in the strength of some limbs was detected after IVIg. While during placebo none (0%) of the lower-extremity muscles improved by more than 3 points, 39% of the limbs improved by more than 3 points ( p < 0.05) after IVIg. Of interest, while 7 of 18 (39%) of the leg muscles improved by more than 3 points, 5 of 18 (25%) of the muscles worsened by 3 points during the same period, indicating that in the same limbs, while some muscles have the potential to improve, others may continue to worsen (see table 1). The functional significance of this artificially defined 3-point gain or loss per limb is unknown. Patients randomized to placebo for the first period had a better baseline swallowing function compared with those randomized to IVIg (table 2), with a significant difference in the D, (second dry swallow) and W, (third wet swallow). However, during placebo, the duration of both the dry and wet swallows worsened but improved significantly when crossed to IVIg. Similarly, for Swallowing function.  scores), in pounds, for each patient at the second phase of the study, shows the change in scores from baseline (at crossover) for the patients who received N I g (after they were initially randomized to placebo) and for those who crossed over to placebo (after initially receiving N I g ) (right). The trend toward increasing strength after N I g is again noted. the IVIg-randomized patients the duration of the swallows significantly improved compared with baseline for this period (see table 2). Some residual effect continued during the placebo phase that followed the IVIg treatment (see table 2). This was done retrospectively, after the patients had finished both treatments, based on increased energy and strength or a decline (or no change) during each phase. Although a mild headache was noted by some, there were no serious side effects to unblind the patients. One patient who noted improvement also noted a more severe headache. Sixteen of the 19 patients correctly identified the period during which they received placebo or IVIg. Two patients were unsure, and one incorrectly identified the placebo as IVIg and the IVIg period as placebo. Thirteen patients indicated some degree of improvement during IVIg. The improvement was expressed as increased energy, or increased function in some daily activities such as walking, climbing up steps, or turning in bed. Six patients stated that they felt weaker after crossing to placebo. Among the treated patients, nine pursued IVIg therapy independently because, according to their own assessment, it had made a difference in their daily activities and quality of life.

Patient's own assessment. Correlation with the muscle biopsy and amyloid deposits. Although quantification o f the histologic features was not performed, the degree of inflammation and amyloid deposits within the vacuolated fibers o f the muscle biopsies of the patients who responded objectively to IVIg was not overall different compared with those who did not notice any improvement.

Discussion. In this double-blind, placebocontrolled, crossover study, the effect of IVIg did not differ significantly compared with placebo in overall muscle strength, the primary outcome measure. However, there were increased regional effects of unknown clinical significance in certain muscle groups of the lower extremities and in the muscles controlling swallowing function. Furthermore, while we noted minor gains in muscle strength in certain muscles, other muscles worsened during the same period. These observations indicate that even though the overall effect was not significant, possibly because of the small sample size, IVIg may exert a modest improvement in certain muscle groups at a given stage of the disease.

In spite of regional increases of strength in certain muscles, the improvement was perceived as functionally important by only 9 of 19 patients who independently sought IVIg after completing the study. This may be related to two factors. First, the "improvement" may be regional and noticeable only in certain muscles, not sufficient to improve function or performance of daily activities, but enough to cause increased energy and reduced fatigue as noted by some. Second, in the same patient, an improvement in certain muscle groups was often associated by the same degree of worsening in other muscle groups, producing a negative net effect in the patient's global strength. Whether only certain immunopathologic changes responsible for muscle fiber injury are amenable to IVIg therapy is unclear. Because IBM begins insidiously, and the duration of the disease in a given muscle is difficult to assess objectively, the longer the duration of the disease and the greater the degree of vacuolization or replacement of muscle fibers by fibrous tissue, the more resistant these muscles may be to immunotherapies. IVIg, by inhibiting cytokines or blocking Fc receptors on macrophages,I9 may affect only muscle groups with intense endomysial inflammation and not muscles with intense vacuolization and fibrosis.

For those patients who improved by more than 10 points, the improvement was often functionally significant in their daily activities, as described by the patients before the code was broken. Additionally, when patients were crossed over to placebo or stopped IVIg, their strength declined, suggesting that IVIg can improve function in a small number of IBM patients.

IVIg is a prohibitively expensive drug, and IBM is resistant to all therapies. Does the moderate global benefit noted in a few patients and the mild benefit in certain muscle groups noted in others justify the use of IVIg in this disease? The present findings do not provide an answer but suggest that a large controlled study may be warranted. Because IVIg is not without side effects, especially in the elderly population,19~20~21 the decision to use IVIg for such a moderate or marginal benefit must be weighed against safety and cost.

Acknowledgments

We thank the NIH pharmacy for the randomization, the neurology nursing staff and nurse coordinators of the Neuromuscular Disease Section for the patient care and data collection, and Bayer Pharmaceutical Division for providing IVlg.

As described before,16 measurements of swallowing function included (a) 20 items of a self-assessment questionnaire; (b) 62 individual items of oral motor examination using validated scales; (c) videofluoroscopy; and (d) ultrasound swallowing that measures objectively the mean time (seconds) needed to complete three wet (Wl, W,, W,) and three dry (Dl, D,, D,) swallows based on a frame-by-frame analysis.

placebo or IVIg; (b) define what phase of treatment they experienced any improvement; (c) rate their overall change by indicating if their muscle strength had remained stable, improved, or worsened; and (d) specify if an improvement was meaningful in their activities of daily living.

Figure 1 .1Figure 1. Differences in MRC scores at baseline and 3 months after treatment. Open bars represent individual patients initially randomized to placebo and closed bars those randomized to IVIg.

Figure 2 .2Figure 2. (A) Differences in MRC scores for each patient from baseline to 3 months after initial randomization to placebo (open bars), and then 3 months later after crossing over to IVIg (closed bars). Patients 4, 7, and 9 improved by more than 10 points. (B) Difference in MRC scores for each patient from baseline to 3 months after initial randomization to IVIg (closed bars), and then 3 months after crossing over to placebo (open bars). Note that patients 1, 2, and 9 improved by 10 or more points. Patient 2 refused to cross over to placebo.

Figure 3 .3Figure 3. Total modified MRC scores for each patient initially randomized to placebo (---) (left) or N I g ( 4 (right) from baseline to end of a 3-month trial, and after crossing over to N I g (-) (left) or placebo (---) (right). Note the trend for improvement in the scores after IVIg (-1 and the decline during placebo (---).

Figure 4 .4Figure 4. Quantitative muscle strength scores (megascores), in pounds, for each patient at the second phase of the study, shows the change in scores from baseline (at

Table 11Effect of N I g in inclusion body myositis: Limb by limb analysisPlaceboM g(10 patients)(9 patients)Upper1 +3 : 2/20 limbs = 10%> +3 : 4/18 limbs = 22%extremities:"> -3 : 3/20 limbs = 15%> -3 : 5/18 limbs = 28%Lower> +3 : 0/20 limbs = 0%> +3 : 7/18 limbs = 39%extremities:?> -3 : 7/20 limbs = 35%> -3 : 5/18 limbs = 28%* p < 04.t p < 0.05.

Table 22Mean duration (seconds) of ultrasound swallows at baseline, 3 months, and end of crossover of 19 patients with IBM treated with placebo

or N I gType ofswallow Baseline 3 Months CrossoverPlaceboIVIgPatientsD,2.331.831.91Randomized toD Z2.151.751.88Placebo (n= 10)D31.84"2.84"1.83"w,1.59"2.25"1.86"w 22.491.962.00w 31.59"2.07"2.44*IVIgPlaceboPatientsD,3.00"1.62"1.47Randomized t oDZ3.37"2.02"2.31IVIg (n=9)D32.352.74"1.85"w,1.821.861.47w,1.73"1.24"1.54w 31.98"1.49"1.48" p = .05.D = dry swallow; W = wet swallow. March 1997 NEUROLOGY 48 715

