Inclusion Body Myositis and Transitional Cell Carcinoma of the Bladder: Significant Resolution of Symptoms After Tumor Excision

Inclusion body myositis (IBM) is a separate class of the inflammatory myopathies with recently proposed clinical and pathological diagnostic criteria. An association between inflammatory myopathies and malignancy has been questioned in the literature. Recent reviews of the inflammatory myopathies suggest that only dermatomyositis is associated with malignancy. The largest study to date of patients with IBM found that 15% had a malignancy (6 of 40). We report the first documented case of IBM and concurrent transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder. We suggest that a causal relationship between IBM and malignancy may exist because of significantly improved functional strength gained after tumor removal.

60mmHg). He was unable to transfer or ambulate independently and required minimal to moderate assistance with activities of daily living (ADL). The patient denied having a history of progressive weakness. His medical history was significant for alcohol abuse (reportedly alcohol intake was discontinued 1 month prior to admission), congestive heart failure, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. His social history revealed that prior to admission he was independent in ADL and lived alone in a single-story home. Initial laboratory studies revealed elevated creatinine phosphokinase (CPK) of 1,790 U/L, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of 428 U/L, and hypoalbuminemia of 1.4 G/DL. The acute hospital course was complicated by a right lower extremity deep venous thrombus, pulmonary embolism, upper gastrointestinal bleed, and paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia. A diagnosis of probable polymyositis was made based on progressive weakness associated with an elevated CPK and no dermatological manifestations. Prednisone (40rag every 8 hours) was prescribed and then tapered slowly over a 3-month course before being discontinued.

At the time of transfer to medical rehabilitation, the patient' s manual muscle test revealed bilateral proximal shoulder and hip 2 strength to be 7-His distal muscle groups in all extremities were 4 3 7. The quadriceps were g bilaterally. Neurological examination found no cranial nerve deficits. Muscle stretch reflexes were 1 2 equal bilaterally at ~ for the biceps and triceps and g for the patella. The Babinski reflex was present bilaterally; there were no proprioceptive deficits. Sensory testing revealed a "stocking glove distribution" of decreased sensation over both the hands and feet. Multiple laboratory evaluation results found to be within normal limits included: thyroid studies, prostatic specific antigen, hepatitis profile, rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibody, antineuronal antibody, IgG, VDRL, and cerebrospinal fluid analysis. Magnetic resonance imaging showed minimal cerebral and cerebellar atrophy. Electrodiagnostic studies showed evidence of a mixed myopathy and neuropathy with positive waves and fibrillations in all the proximal and most of the distal muscles. The right vastus medialis muscle exhibited early full recruitment with a maximal amplitude at lmV. Large polyphasic units were seen in the right first dorsal interosseous muscle. Sensory nerve conduction studies showed prolonged latencies in the right median and ulnar distribution and absent latencies in the right radial and sural nerves. Motor nerve conduction studies revealed prolonged distal latencies of the right ulnar and peroneal nerves along with slowed conduction velocities.

During acute care rehabilitation and steroid therapy the patient developed increased functional strength to the point of attaining independence with ADL and mobility using a roller walker. The patient was discharged home approximately 7 weeks after initial admission to acute medical care and a 4week rehabilitation stay. The patient was discharged on prednisone (10mg per day), which he discontinued 2 weeks after discharge.

Six weeks after his rehabilitation discharge the patient experienced functional decline similar to that of his previous acute Routine screening urinalysis showed microscopic hematuria. Urine cytology revealed abnormal cells suspicious for malignancy; subsequent cystoscopy with bladder biopsy revealed transitional cell carcinoma. Radical cystoprostatectomy with ileal loop urinary diversion was performed. After postoperative stabilization the patient was again admitted to medical rehabilitation, at which time he was noted to be dependent with many ADL, mobility, and transfers. Repeat electrodiagnostic evaluation showed findings similar to the previous exam, consistent with a picture of myopathy coexistent with diffuse axonal polyneuropathy. The patient received two series of gamma globulin treatments, each consisting of 25mg per day for 4 consecutive days.

The patient made slow functional progress with therapies and was discharged to subacute rehabilitation requiring minimal to moderate assistance with ADL and minimal assistance with transfers. He was able to ambulate 100 feet with a roller walker and stand-by assistance. On follow up evaluation 2 months later, the patient was living alone in his own home, independent with all ADL, transfers, and ambulation without an assistive device. Manual muscle testing improved postoperatively with more significant changes in the proximal versus distal muscles; hip flexors and extensors improved from grade ~ to 4 and shoulder

~. abduction from ~ to

The patient's increased strength is also evident by improved motor scores in the Functional Independence Measure (table 1).

DISCUSSION

Inclusion body myositis has been considered a separately identified entity of the inflammatory myopathies in the last 29 years. Clinical and objective evidence for IBM has grown as it has been recognized with increased frequency. 5 Specific clinical and pathological diagnostic criteria of IBM have been proposed (table 2). 5,8 Pathological criteria for diagnosis of IBM include ultrastructural evidence for microtubular filaments in inclusions, immunohistochemistry revealing beta amyloid protein in rimmed vacuoles, light microscopic evidence of congophilic rimmed vacuoles, intranuclear and intracytoplasmic inclusions, and both atrophied and hypertrophic fibers. 5 Clinical criteria for the diagnosis include: proximal and distal muscle weakness, mild elevation of CPK, electrodiagnostic evidence consistent with generalized inflammatory myopathy, and a poor response to high dose corticosteroids. 5 For definitive diagnosis of inclusion body myositis, there must be electron microscopic evidence of microtubular filaments in inclusions, plus two of the above clinical criteria. 5 Our patient met clinical, pathological and electrophysiological diagnostic criteria for inclusion body myositis. In addition the patient's electrodiagnostic studies showed evidence for both myopathic and neuropathic disease. A mixed myopathic and neuropathic picture has been documented in several electrodiagnostic studies of IBM. 9-11 Other possibilities for this patient's mixed myopathic and neuropathic picture include his history of alcohol abuse or a paraneoplastic syndrome.

The patient's concurrent diagnosis of transitional cell carcinoma is unique. Only 10 cases of IBM with malignancy have been reported (table 3). 4'7'12 One study reported two cases of renal cell carcinoma and IBM, but concluded no etiopathologic relationship existed partially because there was no improvement in strength after tumor excision] In dermatomyositis there are a few reports of increased function and sometimes remission of the muscle disease after operative removal of an associated neoplasm. 13 The patient described here regained much of his strength, resumed ADL, and was able to live independently after tumor removal. This strength improvement is most consistent with resolution of the myopathic process and less likely due to deconditioning alone. None of the previously described cases of IBM with malignancy have reported any functional improvement after tumor excision.

Considerable debate exists about the association of malignancy with other inflammatory myopathies. 6'14'15 A recent review of inflammatory myopathies shows an apparent increased incidence of malignant conditions associated only with dermatomyositis. 6 Other studies have shown an increased incidence of malignancy with both polymyositis and dermatomyositis. 14-16

The largest study of IBM patients reports that 6 of 40 patients had a malignancy (15%). However there were differing time intervals between the diagnosis of IBM and the onset of malignancy, with one occurring up to 19 years later} 7 Differing time intervals can vary interpretations and pathogenetic implications) 4 In our case, however, the amelioration of symptoms in a close relationship to the removal of the tumor suggests that it might have been a pathogenetic mechanism of the IBM.

CONCLUSION

A causal association between IBM and malignancy remains undetermined. The clinical features and criteria for IBM are likely to be modified as new cases are documented. 5 We believe this is the first reported case with a concurrent diagnosis of transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder and improvement in functional strength after tumor excision. We raise the possibility that cancer was causally related to IBM in this patient. The nature of the association between IBM and malignancy remains to be seen. To determine the precise association between IBM and malignancy, well-designed case controlled studies with larger populations are needed.

Acknowledgment:

We thank Judy Barnes and staff, and Bunny Lane-Patenge for their technical support with this paper.

Table 1 : Motor FIM Scores of Patient at Different Admissions and Follow-up1Third Admission to

Table 2 : Proposed Diagnostic Criteria for Inclusion Body Myositis2Pathological Criteria for IBMElectronmicroscopy (EM)1. Microtubular filaments in incisionsImmunohistochemistry (IH)1. B-Amyloid protein/ubiquitin in rimmed vacuolesLight Microscopy (LM)1. Congophilic rimmed (lined) vacuoles2. Intranuclear & intracytoplasmic inclusions3. Atrophied fibers/hypertrophic fibersClinical Criteria for IBMClinic Criteria (CC)1. Proximal muscle weakness (insidious onset)2. Distal muscle weakness3. EMG findings of generalized inflammation myopathy4. Mild elevation of creatine kinase and/or aldolase5. Refractory to high dose corticosteroids (for 3 to 4 months)Diagnosis for IBM1. Definite diagnosis of IBM requires EM1 or IH1 + CC1 + one otherCC2. Probable diagnosis of IBM requires IH1 or LM1 and 2 + CC1 +three other CC3. Possible diagnosis of IBM requires LM2 and 3 or LM1 and 3 + any3 CCAdapted and reprinted with permission?

