Magnetic resonance imaging of the forearm as a diagnostic aid in patients with sporadic inclusion body myositis

Because weakness of finger flexors and atrophy of the forearms are frequent findings in inclusion body myositis (IBM) patients, we examined the forearm muscles by MRI to determine if involvement of the distal musculature has a characteristic diagnostic pattern. We performed MRI of the forearms in 21 randomly selected patients with histologically confirmed IBM and in 9 patients with other, age-matched, neuromuscular diseases who served as controls.

In addition, we analyzed axial images of 10 individual forearm muscles blindly without knowledge of the clinical status or diagnosis of the patients. TI-weighted MR images showed marbled brightness of the flexor digitorum profundus (FDP) in 20 of 21 IBM patients, of the flexor carpi ulnaris in 7, the flexor digitorum superficialis (FDS) in 6, the flexor carpi radialis in 4, the supinator in 3, and the brachioradialis in 1. The extensors were normal. The abnormalities of the FDP correlated with the severity but not the duration of the disease and in some patients preceded overt clinical signs of FDP weakness. In contrast, the FDS was spared even late in the disease. We conclude that selective involvement of the FDP may occur early in the course of IBM and can be easily demonstrated by MRI in up to 95% of patients. Because selective FDP involvement appears to be a very frequent and characteristic finding in patients with IBM, MRI of the forearm is a useful noninvasive test in supporting the diagnosis of sporadic IBM.

Sporadic inclusion body myositis (IBM) is a lateonset, male-predominant, inflammatory myopathy with proximal and distal muscle weakness and a characteristic muscle patholog~.l-~ The clinical pattern of IBM differs from polymyositis and dermatomyositis by the high frequency of distal involvement, slowly progressive course, and unresponsiveness to therapy. Histologically, the diagnosis of IBM is based on the characteristic muscle biopsy findings of red-rimmed vacuoles, atrophic fibers, endomysial inflammation, amyloid deposits, and 15-to 18-nm tub~lofilaments.l-~ Clinically, the presence of weakness and atrophy of certain muscle groups, particularly the quadriceps and deep finger flexors, appears to be a consistent and early finding.l.* On the basis of clinical and MRI findings, we have previously demonstrated the frequent occurrence of quadriceps muscle involvement in patients with sporadic IBM.1,3,5,6 However, selective involvement of the deep finger flexors, particularly the fourth and fifth digits, has not been objectively and systematically documented.

The complexity of the arrangement of the forearm muscles makes the precise localization of the clinical findings, particularly atrophy, difficult on a musclespecific basis. The use of MRI allows for identification and quantification of the specific deep and superficial muscles in the f ~r e a r m . ~-~ Additionally, by using different MRI pulse sequences, muscle involve-ment can be characterized as fatty changes on the basis of brightness on TI-weighted images or edema on the basis of brightness on short tau inversion recovery (STIR) imaging. [10][11][12][13] In this report, we describe the characteristic clinical and MRI findings of the forearm musculature in IBM patients compared with disease controls.

Methods.

Patients. Twenty-one randomly selected patients (4 women and 17 men; mean age, 59.4 years) with sporadic IBM were examined clinically and by forearm MRI. The diagnosis was confirmed in all patients by histologic examination of muscle biopsy specimens from the quadriceps, biceps, or the deltoid muscles according to previously established Onset of symptoms to time of presentation to our institution averaged 6.5 years, with a range of 2 to 12 years. A comparison group of nine patients (two women and seven men, aged 34 to 80 years [average age, 49 years]) with other neuromuscular diseases (two with polymyositis, two with neuropathy, two with mitochondria1 myopathy, one with metabolic myopathy, one with limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, and one with post-polio syndrome) was also examined clinically and by MRI.

The degree of muscular atrophy in the forearm muscle was judged as none, mild, moderate, or severe. Muscle strength of the flexor digitorum profundus (FDP) was graded from 0 to 10 using the Modified Medical Research Council (MMRC) Clinical assessment of muscle involvement. scale14 as follows: normal = MMRC scale score of 10; mild = 7-9; moderate = 4-6; severe = 0-3.

Patients were imaged in the prone position with arms extended and the radial side up. Noncontrasted axial images a t a slice thickness of 10 mm were obtained with a 0.5-T Picker MRI scanner using the following pulse sequences: STIR (repetition time [msec]/echo time [msec]/ inversion time [msec] = 1,500-2,450/30/100) and T,weighted spin echo (300-55Of10-16).

The MR images were reviewed without reference to clinical data. The MRI signal intensity of 10 individual muscles was analyzed (figure 1) and assigned a score as follows: normal; mild when inhomogeneity was present; moderate when areas of marbled hyperintensity were present; and seuere when confluent areas of hyperintensity were present. Muscle anatomy was confirmed by comparison with standard anatomy.15-17

After MRI data were collected, comparison was made between the hyperintensity of the FDP on T,-weighted images and the degree of weakness observed on clinical examination.

MRI.

Results. Clinical assessments. Weakness of the deep finger flexors, particularly of the fourth and fifth digits, was noted at presentation in 19 of 21 (90%) of the IBM patients. Eleven patients (52%) demonstrated abnormal fisting, and 7 (33%) were unable to completely close their fist (figure 2). In no patients with IBM was there clinical involvement of other forearm muscles in the absence of FDP involvement. In all IBM patients, the flexor digitorum superficialis (FDS) was spared relative to the degree of FDP involvement. On average, the FDS was 2 grades stronger than the FDP using the 10-point MMRC scale. Selective atrophy of the medial volar muscles (forearm flexor group) was noted in 15 of 21 (71%) of the patients.

In four patients with IBM, the disease was first manifested with hand weakness. Earliest complaints included weakened handshake and difficulty with gripping golf clubs or bowling ball, playing the guitar, and grasping rolls of upholstery. In the remaining 17 patients, the initial symptoms were related to proximal lower-extremity weakness.

In the 21 patients with IBM, the most frequent finding on forearm MRI was a varying degree of selective involvement of the FDP as noted by increased signal intensity of T,-weighted imaging in 20 of the 21 patients (figure 3). This hyperintensity, indicative of fatty replacement, was predominantly in the belly of the muscle and not along its entire length. Despite clinical involvement, most noted in the fourth and fifth digits, there was no correlation of the fatty infiltration to a specific area within the FDP. In three patients, both forearms underwent MR imaging, and in two of them the degree of involvement was asymmetric. Other hyperintense muscles noted on T,-weighted imaging included flexor carpi ulnaris in seven patients, FDS in six, flexor carpi radialis in four, supinator in three, and brachioradialis in one. No hyperintensity was noted in the hand or wrist extensor muscles on T,-weighted images. Atrophy of the FDP muscle was noted in 16 of 21 (76%) of the patients; in seven of them the atrophy was graded as severe (see figure 3C).

Brightness on STIR-weighted images, implying edema, was noted in six patients. The FDP was involved in four patients, the extensor digitorum in one, the pronator teres M R imaging. The signal intensity score of the FDP on T,-weighted MRI but not on STIR sequences appeared to correlate with the degree of clinical involvement (table). In 14 patients, the severity correlated exactly. However, in three patients the TI-weighted MRI showed mild involvement of the FDP in the absence of clinically detectable weakness. In five patients, the MRI findings were not as severe as the clinical disease. Disease duration did not necessarily correlate  * Three patients underwent MR imaging of both forearms for a total of 24 MRI studies.

t Three patients with no detectable clinical involvement had abnormal MRI, including one patient with asymmetric disease who was counted twice. $ One patient had mild clinical disease and normal MRJ.

involvement of the FDP on TI-weighted images, the average age was 53 years for no involvement, 51.8 years for mild involvement, 59.3 years for moderate involvement, and 69.2 years for severe involvement. No age-related changes of the FDP were noted in the control population, including an 80-year-old gentleman.

Discussion. The involvement of the forearm musculature, even early in the disease, causing weakness of the deep finger flexors is a characteristic clinical sign in IBM. We now present evidence that this is due t o selective FDP involvement that can be demonstrated by T,-weighted MRI.

MRI is a noninvasive technique that allows for identification and quantitation of the size of deep and superficial muscles of the forearm without interference of the overlying subcutaneous tissues even in obese patients. In addition to assessing muscle bulk, the diseased muscle can also be detected by MRI by using certain techniques that select for fat (T,weighting) or edema (STIR imaging).

The distribution of the fatty infiltration in the FDP muscle of IBM patients using the T,-weighted images was predominantly in the muscle belly and not along the entire length, suggesting that the MRI detects changes only after a certain degree of fatty infiltration and fibrosis has taken place. Also, in a few patients, the FDP muscle showed abnormalities by STIR imaging implying possible muscle edema caused by inflammation as seen with this technique in some muscles of patients with active polymyosi-tis5x6 The absence of changes in the FDP by STIR imaging in most patients, despite T,-weighted involvement, suggests that the observed abnormalities represent atrophy and fatty replacement rather than inflammation. Overall, the degree of T,-weighted MRI abnormalities of the FDP correlated with disease severity but not disease duration, probably caused by the insidious nature of the disease and the difficulty pinpointing its onset. Although we did not notice any false-positive images, recent traumas or ischemic muscle injuries in the area of the FDP can show signs of increased signal intensity on TI-weighted images and should be excluded when MRI is used for diagnostic purposes.

Sparing of the FDS until late in the disease, despite involvement of the FDP, was dramatic both clinically and on MRI. Among other diseases showing selective muscle involvement or sparing patterns are gastrocnemius muscle involvement in Miyoshi's myopathy, sparing of the quadriceps muscle in hereditary IBM affecting Iranian Jews and some other ethnic groups,18 and selective scapular involvement in facioscapulohumeral dystrophy. What accounts for selective involvement or sparing of individual muscles in myopathic diseases is unknown.

We conclude that TI-weighted MRI of the forearm is a useful, noninvasive test for confirming the diagnosis of IBM because it demonstrates a characteristic pattern of involvement with high specificity. The technique may be utilized to confirm the diagnosis in patients with probable IBM when they do not fulfill all the required histologic criteria, in spite of a characteristic clinical pattern.

864 NEUROLOGY 4848Figure 1. TI-weighted MRI of the forearm of a normal control muscle at the level of the radial tuberosity demonstrating normal anatomy of individual muscles. R: radius; U: ulnar; FDP: flexor digitorum profundus; FCU: flexor carpi ulnaris; PL: palmaris longus; FDS: flexor digitorum superficialis; FCR: flexor carpi radialis; PT: pronator teres; BR: brachioradialis; ECR: extensor carpi radialis; ECU: extensor carpi ulnaris; S: supinator. (The difference in the shading is due to the forearm positioning within the coil.)

Figure 2 .2Figure 2. Incomplete closure of hand with selective involvement of the fourth and fifth digits on attempted fisting i n a patient with IBM whose MRI is shown in figure 3C.

TableCorrelation of clinical findings in 21 IBM patients with TI-weighted forearm images in a total of 24 MRI studies_ . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _Number of studied patientsBYClinical severityClinicallyMRI"Normal3t (14%)1.t (4%)Mild6 (27%)10 (42%)Moderate4 (18%)6 (25%)Severe9 (41%)7 (29%)

