New developments in hereditary inclusion body myopathies

The term inclusion body myositis was introduced in 1971 by Yunis and Samaha [I]  to describe a subset of patients with chronic polymyositis whose muscle biopsies showed, in addition to inflammation, abnormal muscle fibers containing vacuoles and characteristic filamentous inclusions in the cytoplasm and nuclei.

Since that time, sporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM), now recognized as the most common muscle disease in patients older than age 50, has received considerable attention (reviewed in References 2 and 3).

Recent interest in s-IBM has been stimulated by the identification within s-IBM muscle fibers of congophilic amyloid [4] and other striking pathologic features that had not been thought to occur in diseased human muscle [2]. Those features include abnormal accumulation of P-amyloid protein (AP), two other epitopes of the P-amyloid precursor protein (PAPP), hyperphosphorylated T, a,-antichymotrypsin, apolipoprotein E (ApoE), and ubiquitin. Accumulations of these same proteins are also characteristic of Alzheimer disease (AD) brain [2].

A few years ago, we introduced the term hereditary inclusion body myopathies (h-IBMs) [5] to encompass hereditary progressive muscle diseases with muscle pathology that strikingly resembled pathology of s-IBM, except for lack of lymphocytic inflammation; hence, the term myopathy instead of myositis.

In the past, several autosomal dominant and recessive vacuolar myopathies have been described under various names (reviewed in References 2 and 3). When filamentous inclusions characteristic of IBM were identified in muscle fibers of some of those families, the terms familial inclusion body myositis and familial inclusion body myositis-like syndromes were used by some of the authors (reviewed in References 2 and 3 ) . Diagnostic criteria of the h-IBMs have not yet been widely established, and patients having what appears to be a form of typical h-IBM are still being described as other syndromes.

In several Iranian (Persian) Jewish families, an auto-soma1 recessive quadriceps-sparing vacuolar myopathy, associated with weakness distally in lower limbs, was described in 1984 [6]. Subsequently, an identical quadriceps-sparing vacuolar myopathy, also with distal lower-limb weakness and having cytoplasmic and nuclear filamentous inclusions, was described in Kurdish-Iranian and Afghani Jews (reviewed in References 2 and 3). Their pathologic resemblance to s-IBM was emphasized [7]. Recently, in vacuolated muscle fibers of Iranian-Jewish patients with h-IBM, it has been shown that there are abnormal accumulations of the same Alzheimer-characteristic proteins as are present in s-IBM [2], except for paucity of congophilia and of some epitopes of phosphorylated I [2], and different expression of ApoE immunoreactivity [8].

In 1996, a major step forward was localization of the abnormal gene in h-IBM Iranian-Jewish families to chromosome 9 pl-ql [9]. Now Argov and colleagues [lo] report new data demonstrating the same gene locus in two Afghani-Jewish families, in one Iraqi-Jewish family, and in one non-Jewish family from India. All patients had in their muscle biopsies pathology characteristic of h-IBM, and it is interesting that in all of them the quadriceps muscle was either spared or the least affected (thus, they are clinically and pathologically similar, not of "various types" as stated in the title) [lo]. By contrast, one large autosomal recessive French-Canadian family having typical h-IBM muscle pathology, but no sparing of quadriceps and having additional central nervous system involvement [ 111, did not link to the chromosome 9 pl-ql locus [lo].

Japanese patients having an autosomal recessive distal myopathy with rimmed vacuoles were described in 1981 by Nonaka and associates [ 121. Muscle pathology of this syndrome is strikingly similar to that of h-IBM in Iranian Jews, including the same spectrum of abnormal proteins within the vacuolated muscle fibers [13]. Moreover, as in the h-IBM of Iranian Jews, the quadriceps muscle was reported to be spared in several Japanese patients, and in all patients it was less affected than other distal muscles [14]. Now Ikeuchi and coworkers [ 151 report that the abnormal gene of this Japanese vacuolar myopathy also maps to chromosome 9 p l -q l .

The studies by Argov and colleagues [ 101 and Ikeuchi and co-workers [15] are important because they show the same chromosome 9 pl-ql locus in patients with autosomal recessive vacuolar myopathy of different ethnicity. Moreover, in an autosomal recessive quadriceps-sparing Mexican family with h-IBM [ 161, we have identified the same gene locus as well as confirmed it in h-IBM of Iranian Jews living in the United States (Middleton LT, Christodoulou K, Engel WK, Askanas V, unpublished data).

Although the pl-ql gene locus is still large and there is no obvious candidate gene, studies by Argov and col-leagues and Ikeuchi and co-workers illustrate the importance of correlating data from molecular genetics with characteristic pathology and clinical presentation. It is apparent that Japanese "distal myopathy with rimmed vacuoles" and the above examples of "quadriceps-sparing h-IBM" are the same disorder or very closely related disorders. Now it is very important to establish a classification and nomenclature for the hereditary IBMs, which include some "distal myopathies."

(Autosomal dominant forms of h-IBM have muscle pathology like that of autosomal recessive h-IBM [reviewed in References 2 and 31, but they will not be herein discussed.)

It is of particular interest that s-IBM and all recessive and dominant forms of the h-IBMs have specific pathologic features in common, including vacuolar degeneration of muscle fibers; filamentous inclusions composed of paired-helical filaments containing phosphorylated T ; and accumulations of PAPI' epitopes, ApoE, and other Alzheimer-characteristic proteins [2]. The forms of h-IBM with different genetic transmission probably have different genetic defects, and s-IBM has a definitely different, yet unknown (possibly viral [2]), etiology. The following two important questions emerge: (1) What causes the Alzheimer-like pathologic features in s-and h-IBM muscle fibers? And (2) are those abnormalities the result of the same final pathogenic cascade occurring in all forms of the IBMs, despite their different etiologies? We have suggested that in the IBMs various causes lead to the same pathologic process [2].

The same questions are being asked regarding AD.

Despite three different genetic defects (identified thus far) causing early-onset familial AD, and the ApoE genetic risk factor existing in some late-onset sporadic AD patients, all forms of AD have virtually the same brain pathology [ 171, suggesting that the final common pathway is the same in familial and sporadic AD [ 171.

In a recent editorial, Hyman [18] 

has similarly concluded that it is one "Alzheimer disease" rather than several "Alzheimer diseases" because, despite different etiologies, there is a common pathophysiologic process to which various genetic and other factors contribute.In neither the IBMs nor the ADS is the pathogenic cascade well understood. With the genetic locus of one form of autosomal recessive h-IBM now identified, delineation of the abnormal gene will follow. Knowledge of what this abnormal gene is and how it affects the muscle fiber, coupled with detailed analyses of possible factors causing s-IBM, can lead to clarification of the proposed common pathway causing the characteristic IBM-type of vacuolar muscle degeneration and, more important, to methods of its treatment and prevention.Valerie Askanas, MD, PhDUSC Neuromuscular CenterDepartment of NeurologyUniversily of Southern Calfornia School of MedicineGood Samaritan HospitalLos Angeles, CA

