Treatment of inflammatory myopathies

The treatment of the immune-mediated inflammatory myopa-

INVITED REVIEW

thies remains largely empirical. Corticosteroids are usually effective in polymyositis and dermatomyositis but may need to be combined with methotrexate or azathioprine in some patients. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) is effective as add-on therapy in some patients not adequately controlled with steroids or immunosuppressive agents, but further controlled trials of IVIg are necessary to define the indications and optimal dose regimens. Cyclophosphamide, cyclosporin, or chlorambucil may be effective in patients with refractory polymyositis or dermatomyositis. Low-dose whole body or lymphoid irradiation is a last option in severely disabled patients resistant to all other treatments. As a small proportion of patients with inclusion body myositis respond to corticosteroid or immunosuppressive therapy, a 3-6month trial of such therapy is justified in this condition. More specific immunotherapy for these disorders awaits identification of the target antigens and further clarification of the immunopathogenetic mechanisms.

example, while most patients with PM or DM have a favorable response to treatment, patients with IBM are generally resistant to treatment and it is therefore presenting cells await the identification of specific important that this diagnosis should be established antigenic determinants and further characterization as early as possible. Other poor prognostic indicators of T-cell populations involved in the autoimmune include advanced age, long delay to diagnosis and process.

initiation of treatment, the presence of certain myositis-specific autoantibodies, and associated malig-IMMUNOPATHOGENESIS nancy, vasculitis, or other systemic disease. 11,43 The major distinguishing features of the three It is now firmly established that different immunopathogenetic mechanisms underlie the three main main forms of inflammatory myopathy are summarized in Table 2. In DM, the characteristic skin forms of idiopathic inflammatory myopathy. 26,31 In DM there is a complement-dependent humoral at-changes on the face, trunk, and extremities are diagnostic when present but are sometimes inconspicu-tack on as yet unidentified vascular endothelial cell antigens, leading to a distinctive form of microangio-ous, being easily overlooked in darker skinned patients, and may not be present at the time of initial pathy in skin and muscle. There is deposition of the C5b-9 membrane attack complex of complement in presentation. In DM and PM muscle weakness is usually diffuse and nonselective but more severe proxi-the walls of intramuscular arterioles and capillaries and depletion of the muscle capillary bed, which is mally, whereas in IBM there is characteristically selective involvement of the quadriceps femoris muscles an early change. 30,57,76 The resulting disruption of the muscle microcirculation is thought to account for the in the lower limbs and of the forearm flexor muscles in the upper limbs, although this selectivity is less characteristic histopathological changes of groups of necrotic muscle fibers, microinfarcts, and perifascicu-apparent in the later stages and asymmetric and atypical patterns of muscle involvement are found in some lar atrophy. 15,53 The contribution of cellular immune mechanisms remains unclear. In contrast, in PM and cases. An elevated serum creatine kinase (CK) level supports the diagnosis of an inflammatory myopathy, IBM cellular immune mechanisms have been directly implicated in causing the muscle fiber injury. There but the CK level is normal or only mildly elevated in some cases of DM and most cases of IBM. Electromy-is a predominance of cytotoxic CD8ϩ T cells in the endomysial cellular infiltrate, major histocompatibil-ography is also important and provides an indication of the extent and severity of the myositis. Muscle ity complex (MHC) class I expression by muscle fibers, and invasion of nonnecrotic muscle fibers by biopsy is the definitive diagnostic procedure and should be performed in all cases prior to commence-CD8ϩ lymphocytes and macrophages. 3,31,46,85 The role of the T-cell response in IBM and its relationship to ment of treatment to provide confirmation of the presence and type of inflammatory myopathy and to the degenerative process, which is associated with the accumulation of amyloid and a variety of other allow rarer forms such as granulomatous, eosino-philic, angiopathic, and parasitic myositis to be recog-muscle testing (MMT), hand-held myometry, isokinized. An open biopsy is preferable to a needle biopsy netic dynamometry, and functional scales. MMT, with and will reduce the likelihood of nonspecific or norgrading using the conventional MRC scale (0-5) or mal findings. 71 an expanded scale (0-10), is of limited value for the serial assessment of muscle function because of the ASSESSMENT OF RESPONSE TO TREATMENT subjectivity of the technique and nonlinearity of scoring with documented insensitivity to change, particu-Evaluation of the effect of therapy in patients with larly at the upper end of the scale. 75,81 These problems inflammatory muscle disease should be performed can be overcome by the use of myometry and dynausing reliable clinical and laboratory criteria and the mometry, which are used in most neuromuscular assessment protocol should include quantitative meaclinics. sures of muscle function which have sufficient sensi-Hand-held myometry, using the Penny & Giles tivity to document significant changes over a period myometer or a similar instrument, provides a meaof time as well as biochemical indices of muscle damsure of isometric force on a linear interval scale (Figs. age (Table 3).

1-4) and has been used in a number of studies of Evaluation of Muscle Function. The assessment patients with inflammatory muscle disease. 44,102 To techniques which have been used include manual provide accurate and reliable results the position of the patient and of the myometer must be standardized and testing should be performed by trained ex-  Effect of IVIg therapy in a 52-year-old male with scleroderma and PM of 6 months duration prior to the first assessment who had continued to deteriorate while on prednisolone and suffered a severe hypersensitivity reaction with pneumonitis on methotrexate. Muscle force was measured with a dynamometer for knee extensors (A) and with a myometer for the neck flexors (B) and improved progressively in both muscle groups after commencement of IVIg, which was continued for a total of eight courses. FIGURE 1. Variation in muscle force with prednisolone therapy in a 68-year-old female with DM of 3 years duration prior to the first assessment. Isometric force measured with a myometer for shoulder abductors (A) and knee extensors (B) is shown with corresponding prednisolone doses and CK levels (C). Force decreased in both muscle groups with reduction and eventual cessation of prednisolone and then improved progressively following reintroduction of the drug. The variations in force occurred without any change in the MRC grade of the muscles. alt.die, alternate day. (Reproduced from Mastaglia FL, Laing BA, Zilko P: Treatment of inflammatory myopathies, in Mastaglia FL (ed): Inflammatory Myopathies: Baillie `re's Clinical Neurology. London, Baillie `re Tindell, 1993, pp 717-740, with the permission of the publisher.) possible to accurately measure the maximal strength of muscles such as the quadriceps, particularly when the muscle is near normal or normal in strength, and force was measured with a myometer for the hip flexors. After the first assessment, prednisolone was commenced at a dose of 5). However, normal data using a protocol suitable 50 mg/day, reducing to 20 mg/alternate day by 10 months and for patients with inflammatory muscle disease have to 15 mg/alternate day by 20 months. Methotrexate was comnot been published to date. menced at the same time as prednisolone at a dose of 10 mg/ Functional scales and timed tests should ideally week, reducing to 7.5 mg/week at 12 months. There was a proalso be included in the assessment protocol as they gressive improvement in myometer scores over the 40-month period, corresponding to one half of an MRC grade.

reflect the patient's ability to perform daily activities.

inflammatory muscle disease and should be monitored regularly during the course of therapy. Studies of groups of patients with PM or DM have reported a variable relationship between serum CK activity and muscle strength. 59,60,82 However, in our experience the serum CK is an important indicator of disease activity in the individual patient and a rise in CK level, even while still within the normal range, may be the first indication of reactivation of the disease in a patient who has previously been in remission, even before there is any deterioration in muscle function. Measurements of serum levels of myoglobin 51 and of soluble interleukin 2 receptors 103 have also been reported to be sensitive indicators of disease activity in inflammatory myopathies, but are not widely used.

POLYMYOSITIS AND DERMATOMYOSITIS

Initial Therapy. Although their efficacy has never been proven in a randomized clinical trial, corticosteroids remain the mainstay of therapy in the inflammatory myopathies because of their well-established anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive actions. The latter effects occur with doses of prednisolone over 20 mg/day and include a reduction in numbers cell surface molecules and interfere with both anti-

The prednisolone dose was stable at 25 mg/alternate day. (Reprogen-induced and mitogen-induced proliferative lymduced from Mastaglia FL, Laing BA, Zilko P: Treatment of inflammatory myopathies, in Mastaglia FL (ed): Inflammatory Myopaphocyte responses. 4,48 thies. Baillie `re's Clinical Neurology. London, Baillie `re Tindell, Treatment is generally commenced with oral 1993, pp 717-740, with the permission of the publisher.) prednisolone or prednisone in a dose of 50-75 mg/ Activities which may be timed include walking a fixed distance, standing from a chair, 20 climbing stairs, and drinking a set volume of fluid. 102 Functional scales are less sensitive to change than quantitative muscle assessment, particularly toward the higher end of the scale, when the patient's ability to perform daily activities is nearly normal. 58,102 Some patients with inflammatory myopathy may develop weakness of the respiratory muscles, leading to ventilatory insufficiency. Assessment of respiratory muscle function should therefore be performed, particularly in patients with severe disease, and should be monitored throughout the illness. The measurement of forced vial capacity and maximum inspira- sponse to treatment and progress of patients with day (ȁ1 mg/kg of body weight) in single or divided need for more rapid dose reduction and the introduction of a second-line agent, especially in the elderly. doses. The optimal starting dose has not been established, and some authors have advocated the use of There are no reliable guidelines as to the optimal maintenance dose or the duration of steroid therapy. higher or lower doses, 92 while others have recommended initiating therapy with high single-dose alter-

In our experience it is unwise to discontinue therapy until there has been complete suppression of disease nate day prednisolone. 32,43 It has been suggested on the basis of small uncontrolled trials that alternate activity for at least 12 months. When the decision is made to discontinue prednisolone, this should be day therapy may be as effective as daily therapy. 18,101 We do not advocate the use of higher starting doses done very gradually over a period of several months, with dose reductions of 1 mg/day every month and of prednisolone as a routine because of the greater likelihood of inducing side effects, including steroid frequent monitoring of the serum CK level and muscle performance. Reactivation of the disease may still myopathy, and because, in our experience, the outcome has been less favorable in some patients treated occur in some patients, even with such a gradual withdrawal regime (Fig. 1). with higher doses. A somewhat higher dose may however be required for patients being treated with drugs High-dose intravenous pulse therapy with methylprednisolone (500-1000 mg) given daily for 3 days which induce hepatic enzymes because of the increased rate of metabolism of the steroid agent. A or once every 2 weeks has been advocated as initial therapy by some authors. 62,74 However, its relative ef-lower dose of prednisolone may be appropriate in some patients, particularly the elderly, who are more fectiveness and incidence of side effects have not been compared with those of conventional oral ste-prone to develop steroid side effects such as osteoporosis, and in patients with hypoalbuminemia, who roid therapy in a controlled trial. have higher unbound levels of the drug in the plasma.

The initial dose of prednisolone should be main-Combined Therapy. In a double-blind controlled tained for a period of 4-6 weeks. By the end of this trial it was found that the combined use of prednisoperiod clinical improvement will generally have belone and azathioprine from the outset conferred no gun, the serum CK level will usually have fallen subadditional short-term benefits, but that the long-term stantially, and it is usually possible to initiate dose disability was less in patients treated with both drugs reduction. Improvement in muscle strength often from the start. 9,10 In practice however combined therlags behind the fall in the CK level, and this should apy with prednisolone and a second-line agent such not be regarded as a reason to delay reducing the as azathioprine or methotrexate is used only in padose of prednisolone. The dose of prednisolone tients with severe myositis or where the diagnosis has should then be progressively reduced by an average been delayed and the prognosis is considered to be of 5 mg/day every week, reaching a dose of 25-35  poor, or in patients who are considered to be particumg/day by the end of the second month. Some aularly prone to develop steroid side effects and in thors advocate continuing the full dose of prednisowhom the use of a second immunosuppressive drug lone for 2-3 months 92 and a slower rate of tapering will allow more rapid reduction of the dose of predni-(10 mg/month or less) 83 but, in our experience, this solone. 70,106 increases the occurrence of steroid side effects. Conversion to an alternate day single-dose regime is some-Relapses. Relapses in patients who have previously times desirable as a means of reducing steroid side effects and may be initiated at this stage by reducing been improving or in remission are not uncommon and may occur as a result of too rapid a reduction the dose of prednisolone by 5 mg/week on alternate days or even at an earlier stage when tapering is first in the dose of corticosteroids or, in some patients, for no apparent reason, even after a prolonged period of commenced. 92 Muscle power should continue to improve gradually during the second month (Fig. 5) and remission. In some patients reactivation of the disease process may be recognized by a progressive rise in may eventually return to normal, although in many patients there is residual weakness of some muscle the serum CK level, even before clinical deterioration occurs. If a relapse occurs the dose of prednisolone groups such as the hip flexors. Premature or too rapid reduction in the dose of prednisolone once clinical should be increased (up to 50 mg/day) and a daily regime should be reimplemented in patients who are improvement has commenced increases the likelihood of a subsequent relapse. On the other hand, on alternate day therapy. In addition, in patients with more severe relapses a second-line agent such as the development of iatrogenic cushingoid features and of more serious side effects such as psychosis, methotrexate or azathioprine should also be commenced. Intravenous immunoglobulin therapy diabetes, and avascular bone necrosis may dictate the (IVIg) should be considered if improvement does not Methotrexate. Although there have not been any controlled trials of methotrexate, a number of retro-occur or if there is further deterioration (see below).

spective studies have indicated that the drug is of Steroid Myopathy. The possibility of a steroid myopbenefit and may be more effective than azathioprine athy should be considered in any patient who has in some groups of patients with myositis who do not been on doses of prednisolone over 10 mg/day for respond adequately to corticosteroids. 50 Methotrexprolonged periods, and especially in patients who ate is a folic acid analogue, which acts by inhibiting have had a longer than usual period of high-dose the enzyme dihydrofolate reductase and thereby pretherapy, when there is persisting or increasing weakventing the conversion of folic acid to tetrahydrofoness particularly of proximal lower limb muscles after late and resulting in reduced DNA synthesis in prolifthe serum CK level has returned to normal. If a steerating lymphocytes and precursors. Treatment is roid myopathy is suspected, the dose of prednisolone usually commenced with oral methotrexate in a dose should be reduced progressively or changed to an of 7.5-10 mg once weekly, increasing if necessary by alternate day regime, and gradual improvement in 2.5 mg/week every month to a maximum of 20 mg/ muscle function will usually occur. In some cases week. Higher doses of up to 30-40 mg/week may be however it is difficult to know whether deteriorating used, but often cause gastrointestinal symptoms and muscle function is due to persisting myositis, to steit is preferable to administer such doses by the intraroid myopathy, or to a combination of both, and it muscular or intravenous route. 83 may then be necessary to perform further electromy-Side effects are relatively uncommon with the ography and muscle biopsy. A regular program of lower doses and include fever, stomatitis and mouth physical activity is important in patients on corticosteulcers, skin rash, gastrointestinal symptoms, bone roids and has been shown to help prevent or reverse marrow depression, pneumonitis, and hepatotoxicsteroid myopathy. 47 ity. 16 The blood count and liver function tests should be monitored on a monthly basis during treatment

STEROID-RESISTANT CASES

with the drug. Methotrexate is contraindicated in patients with severe obesity, alcoholism, diabetes mel-In a proportion of patients with PM or DM (20-30% in our experience) it is not possible to achieve com-litus, active peptic ulcer, liver disease, or renal failure and is best avoided during pregnancy. Patients who plete control of the disease with corticosteroids alone and it is necessary to introduce a second-line agent.

are folate deficient are more likely to develop bone marrow depression and a folic acid supplement in However, before doing so it is important to reassess the degree of certainty of the diagnosis of inflamma-the form of a 5 mg folic acid tablet given once weekly 4 days after the methotrexate dose is generally recom-tory myopathy and to consider the possibility of a steroid myopathy (see above). The choice of a sec-mended. Methotrexate is not known to have any significant oncogenic side effects. ond-line agent is empirical and there are at present no reliable guidelines for the selection of an immunosuppressive agent or for the use of IVIg. Either metho-Azathioprine. Some authors regard azathioprine as the immunosuppressive agent of choice in patients trexate or azathoprine would usually be selected initially, but there are few comparative data to indicate with inflammatory myopathy. 24 A double-blind controlled trial of azathioprine with prednisolone whether one of these two drugs is any more or less effective than the other. 50 Our preference is for meth-showed no additional short-term benefit to prednisolone alone, but there was less long-term disability in otrexate, which can be given in a single weekly oral dose of 7.5-15 mg, but others favor azathioprine. 24 patients treated with both agents. 9 Azathioprine is a sulphide analogue of the purine As these drugs take several weeks to have any effect, their introduction should be considered at a rela-hypoxanthine, which is converted to 6-mercaptopurine, which in turn inhibits DNA and RNA synthesis tively early stage rather than being delayed until the patient is severely incapacitated. In patients who are in lymphocytes that have entered a phase of proliferation and differentiation. While the major effect is on immunodeficient or who have an adverse reaction to one of the immunosuppressive agents, IVIg is the T cells, the drug may also be effective in antibodymediated disorders which are T-cell dependent. treatment of choice. In the small group of patients whose disease is still not adequately controlled with

The drug is administered orally in a dose of 2-3 mg/day in divided doses with meals. A small propor-these second-line therapeutic modalities, it may be necessary to consider using another immunosuppres-tion of patients (ȁ10%) have an idiosyncratic reaction to the drug with fever, anorexia, vomiting, ab-sive agent such as cyclophosphamide, cyclosporin, or chlorambucil.

dominal pain, myalgia, and skin rash. Other side effects are uncommon and include hepatotoxicity found to be ineffective in 10 of 11 corticosteroidresistant patients, 19 while in another study 4 of 7 pa-and pancreatitis. Transient leukopenia and macrocytosis develop in about 20% of patients 56 and tients with refractory PM improved after administration of intravenous cyclophosphamide in a dose of monthly blood counts should therefore be carried out with liver function tests every 1-2 months. There 500 mg/week. 41 In view of the preferential effect of the drug on B-cell function it has been suggested has been concern about possible oncogenic effects of azathioprine, but the risk is generally considered that it may be more effective for the treatment of DM, especially if there is associated vasculitis. Cyclo-to be low in patients taking the drug for less than 5 years. 17 phosphamide can be administered orally in a daily dose of 2-2.5 mg/kg or intravenously as a pulse dose of 500-1000 mg every 1-4 weeks. Cyclosporin. There have been few studies of the use of cyclosporin in inflammatory myopathies and

The drug commonly induces a mild leukopenia, but treatment may need to be interrupted or the no published controlled trials. Initial reports suggested that low-dose cyclosporin was beneficial in dose reduced if the white cell count falls below 3 ϫ 10 9 /L. Other hematological complications include children with chronic DM which had not been adequately controlled with corticosteroids or other im-thrombocytopenia, anemia, eosinophilia, and pancytopenia. Other adverse effects include gastrointesti-munosuppressive agents 38 and in some adults with PM or DM 64 . In a more recent open study of previously nal symptoms, alopecia, hemorrhagic cystitis, and an increased incidence of malignancies, especially blad-untreated patients with early DM, it was concluded that cyclosporin in a dose of 5 mg/kg/day was as der cancer. Bladder toxicity can usually be avoided by maintaining a high fluid intake during oral ther-effective as prednisolone and azathioprine in inducing a partial or complete remission. 37 apy or by the concomitant administration of equivalent intravenous doses of 2-mercaptoethane sodium Cyclosporin has a more selective action than the other immunosuppressive drugs, inhibiting the acti-sulphonate (MESNA) in patients on pulse therapy. 35,89 The risk of infertility is reduced by using IV vation of T cells and the secretion of cytokines including interleukins 2, 3, 4, and 5 and gamma interferon pulse therapy. However, a sperm sample should be stored before commencement of therapy in males by CD4ϩ T cells. The overall effect is to prevent the proliferation and differentiation of cytotoxic T cells who may wish to have children subsequently. and antibody-producing cells. The drug is administered orally in a divided daily dose starting with Chlorambucil. Although this alkylating agent has not been used extensively in the treatment of patients 3 mg/kg/day and adjusting the dose according to the clinical response and the occurrence of side ef-with inflammatory myopathy, a recent report suggests that it may be effective in resistant cases. 98 In this fects. The major adverse effect is nephrotoxicity, the occurrence of which is usually signalled by a rise in study a beneficial effect was noted within 4-6 weeks in 5 patients with recalcitrant DM who were treated blood pressure and serum creatinine levels, findings which indicate the need to reduce the dose of the with 4 mg/day of chlorambucil. Four of the patients were subsequently able to stop their drugs after 13-30 drug. Other side effects include headache, hirsutism, gingival hypertrophy, gastrointestinal intolerance, months of treatment and remained in remission. The encouraging results of this study warrant further eval-thrombocytopenia, and hemolytic anemia. Patients receiving cyclosporin are also at an increased risk uation in a controlled trial. The drug has similar side effects to other cytotoxic drugs and in particular has of developing lymphomas and other malignancies, particularly those of the skin. However, these malig-been noted to induce a much higher than expected frequency of leukemia. 52 nancies have generally occurred in transplant patients who have been on higher doses of the drug in conjunction with other immunosuppressive drugs.

Immunoglobulin Therapy. There have been a number of reports of the use IVIg therapy in patients with various types of inflammatory myopathy. 25,86,100 Most Cyclophosphamide. The role of cyclophosphamide in refractory inflammatory myopathies has not been have been uncontrolled studies in which IVIg was used as add-on therapy in patients who had failed to evaluated in controlled clinical trials, although there are anecdotal reports of benefit after oral adminis-respond adequately to other forms of treatment. The largest of these was that of Cherin et al., 13 who treated tration. 1,45 Reports of the use of intravenous cyclophosphamide in polymyositis have indicated mixed 20 patients with PM or DM who were also on other forms of treatment at the time, including prednisone, results. In one study monthly intravenous administration of the drug in a dose of 750-1250 mg/m 2 was methotrexate, or plasmapheresis, and reported marked clinical improvement in 15 cases. Other reduction in ICAM-1 expression in capillaries, and a return of endomysial capillary numbers to normal studies have involved smaller numbers of patients. 12,49,61,73,91,93,105 Our own experience with IVIg is in 5 patients who had repeat muscle biopsies after completion of the course of therapy. The authors summarized in Table 4.

The only controlled trial of IVIg to date was that presented evidence that IVIg interrupts the formation of the membrane attack complex and its deposi-of Dalakas et al.,22 who demonstrated a beneficial effect in patients with drug-resistant DM. In this dou-tion in capillaries by inhibiting the deposition of activated C4b and C3b fragments. 6 Other possible ble-blind crossover study, 15 patients were randomized to receive either high-dose IVIg (2 g/kg/ mechanisms of action include binding of anti-idiotypic antibodies to circulating autoantibodies or B cells, month) or placebo with an optional crossover after three courses of treatment. Prednisolone was contin-suppression of T-cell-mediated responses, blockade of macrophage Fc receptors, and inhibition of myo-ued during the trial. Eleven of 12 patients who received IVIg improved and muscle function returned toxic cytokines. 25,29 Although it was suggested that IVIg may be prefer-to normal in 8 cases, including a number who had been severely disabled. The improvement was found able to corticosteroids or other immunosuppressive medications and should be considered as a first-line to correlate with dissolution of deposits of C5b-9, a therapy, 22 it was not found to be effective when used had responded incompletely to corticosteroids and immunosuppressive therapy found no significant dif-as the initial treatment in an open study of 11 patients with PM or DM. 14 The role of IVIg is therefore as an ferences in outcome in the three treatment groups and concluded that neither plasma exchange nor add-on therapy in patients with PM, DM, or overlap syndromes who have not responded adequately to leukapheresis is an effective therapy for these conditions. 77 Significantly, immunosuppressive agents corticosteroids, methotrexate, or azathioprine or in patients who are unable to tolerate these agents or other than prednisone were stopped during this study, whereas in the previous uncontrolled study by who relapse after a period of initial control (Fig. 2). IVIg is the ideal second-line therapy in patients with Dau, 27 patients were maintained on their cytotoxic therapy, and it is possible that the beneficial effects immunodeficiency.

The doses of IVIg and regimes used have varied observed were due to the continuation of these drugs rather than to the plasmapheresis. Because of these in different studies and there are as yet no reliable guidelines as to the optimal administration regime.

uncertainties regarding the efficacy of plasmapheresis, and with the advent of intravenous immunoglobu-In view of the very expensive nature of this form of therapy and the occasional serious complications lin therapy, there is now little justification for the use of plasmapheresis or leukapheresis in patients with which can occur, further studies are required to determine the minimal effective doses and the optimal inflammatory myopathies. therapeutic regimes in different types of inflamma-X Irradiation. Whole body, low-dose X irradiation, tory myopathy. Current practice is to administer a with 150 rads administered in fractionated doses over total dose of 2 g/kg body weight divided over a 5a 5-week period, has been reported to induce worthday period in the initial course (i.e., 0.4/kg/day), while and sustained remissions in a number of pafollowed by monthly 3-day courses for 3-6 months tients with refractory PM who were severely incapacidepending upon the response. When improvement tated. 33,55,80 Total lymphoid irradiation, usually 2000 occurs it is usually apparent after the first or second rads delivered to the lymphoid areas over a 5-6-week course of IVIg. More rapid administration of the imperiod, has also been reported to be effective in some munoglobulin dose over periods of 1-2 days should cases of PM. 92 Adverse reactions were common with be avoided, particularly in elderly patients, in view lymphoid irradiation, but were mild and transient of the significant effects on serum viscosity and the with low-dose whole body irradiation, although there risk of precipitating thromboembolic events. 7,23,97 has been one report of fatal bone marrow suppres-Once improvement occurs it may be possible to gradsion following this regime. 80 Another concern with ually reduce the dose of prednisolone or other immutotal body irradiation is the potential for the later nosuppressive therapy, but this should be done caudevelopment of malignancy. X irradiation should tiously, as the efficacy of IVIg may not be sustained. 90 therefore be considered only in patients who are Immunoglobulin therapy is generally considered unable to tolerate or who fail to respond to all other to be a safe form of treatment and, in our experience, available forms of treatment and who are seriously adverse reactions are uncommon. In a survey of 150 incapacitated by their disease. series of infusions in 64 patients, Bertorini et al. 7 found that the most frequent side effects were head-JUVENILE DERMATOMYOSITIS ache, fever, nausea, IV site discomfort, skin rash or itching, and myalgias. More serious complications

In most cases of juvenile DM it is possible to achieve adequate control of the disease or a complete remis-are rare and include aseptic meningitis, 96 acute renal failure, 88 thromboembolic events, 97 severe hypersensi-sion within the first 2 years with corticosteroids or other immunosuppressive agents. 68 A number of dif-tivity and anaphylactic reactions, 28 and transmission of hepatitis C. The latter has been associated with ferent regimes have been advocated but it is generally agreed that corticosteroids offer the best chance of the use of certain brands of immunoglobulin in the United States and is thought to be more likely to controlling the disease in most patients. There are advocates for both high-dose (prednisolone 2 mg/ occur in immunocompromised patients. 7 kg/day) and low-dose (1 mg/kg/day) steroid regimes, the latter being less likely to cause serious Plasmapheresis. An early uncontrolled study 27 and anecdotal case reports indicated that plasmapheresis steroid side effects such as growth retardation, osteoporosis, and gastrointestinal perforation. 78 Alterna-may be effective in some adult or childhood cases of PM or DM. However, a double-blind randomized trial tively, combined therapy with prednisolone and azathioprine or methotrexate has been advocated as a comparing plasma exchange and leukapheresis with sham apheresis in 39 patients with PM or DM who means of allowing earlier and more rapid reduction in the dose of prednisolone, thereby minimizing side dictated by particular symptoms or findings on clinical examination. In particular, in patients with dys-effects, in particular growth retardation. 79,94 Pulse therapy with intravenous methyl prednisolone (30 phagia, carcinoma of the esophagus or gastroesophageal junction should be excluded by endoscopy mg/kg/day for three successive days followed by weekly or twice-weekly pulses) has been reported to before attributing this symptom to the myositis. Both the inflammatory myopathy and the malig-be effective as initial therapy and to result in a complete remission in some cases. 62 Exacerbations of the nancy in such patients should be treated in their own right along conventional lines. The response disease are relatively common during the first 2 years and can usually be controlled by increasing the ste-to corticosteroids and to other immunosuppressive agents is often less satisfactory than in patients with roid dose for a short period. 68 In patients who are not adequately controlled by isolated DM or PM and it may then be necessary to use immunoglobulin therapy or one of the third-line corticosteroids the same therapeutic options should be considered as in adult cases, namely additional immunosuppressive agents such as cyclophosphamide. There are occasional reports of improvement immunosuppression with azathioprine, methotrexate, 79 cyclosporin, or cyclophosphamide, or intrave-in the myositis following plasmapheresis or removal of the primary malignancy. 67 nous immunoglobulin 93 therapy, all of which have been found to be effective in small uncontrolled tri-INCLUSION BODY MYOSITIS als. Cyclosporin (2.5-7.5 mg/kg) was reported to be effective and safe in a study of 14 children with resis-

In spite of the fact that there is evidence of an autoaggressive T-cell response in muscle in IBM, most pa-tant DM and to lead to significant functional improvement in some patients who had been severely dis-tients fail to respond to corticosteroids or other immunosuppressive agents and continue to deteriorate abled. 42 Hydroxychloroquine (2-5 mg/kg) may be effective in improving both the skin rash and muscle in spite of such therapy. 38 There are however some cases who do improve at least partially with steroids strength in some patients with juvenile DM who respond incompletely to corticosteroids or who relapse and immunosuppressive therapy, or in whom progression of the condition is delayed 63,65,66,95 (Fig. 3). following steroid withdrawal. 84 The subcutaneous calcinosis which develops in In a retrospective review of 25 IBM patients, 10 (40%) felt that there had been some benefit from predniso-many patients with juvenile DM is extremely difficult to control or to reverse once it has developed. Various lone, as did approximately 20% of patients treated with azathioprine or methotrexate. 63 Eleven of the forms of treatment have been tried, including probenecid, colchicine, aluminum hydroxide, diphos-25 patients in this study were subsequently entered into a prospective therapeutic trial of oral azathio-phonates, and low-dose warfarin, but none has been effective in our experience. In some cases surgical prine and methotrexate in incrementing doses, compared to intravenous methotrexate with leucovorin intervention is necessary when calcium deposits ulcerate through the skin over bony prominences, par-rescue, patients receiving 6 months of each regimen. Of the 9 patients who completed the 6-month course ticularly when there is secondary infection. of azathioprine plus methotrexate, 2 were felt to have PARANEOPLASTIC MYOSITIS improved, while the condition was considered to have stabilized in 4 other patients on the basis of manual The occurrence of an inflammatory myopathy has been reported in patients with a variety of malignan-muscle testing and activities of daily living. Of the 10 patients who completed the intravenous methotrex-cies, the most common primary sites being the lung and gastrointestinal tract in males and the breast and ate regimen, 1 improved and 7 stabilized. Intravenous immunoglobulin therapy has been reported to be ovary in females. 5 The risk of malignancy is highest in adult patients with DM but is also increased in beneficial in one small uncontrolled trial, 99 but this has not been confirmed in other studies. 2 In our own PM. 69,104 The association of malignancy is rare in cases of juvenile DM or IBM, or in patients with other experience with 5 IBM patients treated with IVIg for periods of up to 6 months, none achieved any systemic connective tissue diseases. 5,72 The association with malignancy is seen particularly in patients over functional improvement, although myometry showed improvement in some less severely affected the age of 50 years and it is therefore important that such patients should be thoroughly screened for a muscle groups in some patients (Fig. 4). 73 On the basis of the limited data available on the malignancy at the time of presentation. This should include a detailed clinical evaluation, including pel-treatment of this condition, our current practice is to recommend a 3-6-month course of oral predniso-vic and rectal examination, chest X-ray, and mammography in females. Other investigations will be lone alone or in combination with a steroid-sparing Low-dose whole body irradiation was reported to be 1607-1612.   effective in a patient with IBM, 54 but this form of 18. Cook JD, Fink CW, Henderson-Tilton AC: Comparison of the treatment has not undergone further evaluation.

FIGURE 2 .2FIGURE 2.Effect of IVIg therapy in a 52-year-old male with scleroderma and PM of 6 months duration prior to the first assessment who had continued to deteriorate while on prednisolone and suffered a severe hypersensitivity reaction with pneumonitis on methotrexate. Muscle force was measured with a dynamometer for knee extensors (A) and with a myometer for the neck flexors (B) and improved progressively in both muscle groups after commencement of IVIg, which was continued for a total of eight courses. FIGURE 1. Variation in muscle force with prednisolone therapy in a 68-year-old female with DM of 3 years duration prior to the first assessment. Isometric force measured with a myometer for shoulder abductors (A) and knee extensors (B) is shown with corresponding prednisolone doses and CK levels (C). Force decreased in both muscle groups with reduction and eventual cessation of prednisolone and then improved progressively following reintroduction of the drug. The variations in force occurred without any change in the MRC grade of the muscles. alt.die, alternate day. (Reproduced from Mastaglia FL, Laing BA, Zilko P: Treatment of inflammatory myopathies, in Mastaglia FL (ed): Inflammatory Myopathies: Baillie `re's Clinical Neurology. London, Baillie `re Tindell, 1993, pp 717-740, with the permission of the publisher.)

FIGURE 3 .3FIGURE 3. Effects of combined therapy in a 61-year-old female

FIGURE 4 .4FIGURE 4. Effect of IVIg therapy in a 63-year-old female with IBM of 9 years duration prior to the first assessment. Isometric

FIGURE 5 .5FIGURE 5. Effect of prednisolone therapy in a 36-year-old male

14. Cherin P, Piette JC, Wechsler B, Bletry O, Ziza JM, Laraki agent such as methotrexate or azathioprine if the R, Godeau P, Herson S: Intravenous gamma globulin as first patient is considered to be particularly at risk of steline therapy in polymyositis and dermatomyositis: an open study in 11 adult patients. J Rheumatol 1994;21:1092-1097. roid side effects. If there is any indication of improve-15. Comola M, Johnson MA, Howel D, Brinsdon C: Spatial ment or stabilization of the condition on the basis distribution of muscle necrosis in biopsies from patients of quantitative muscle testing or functional scales, a with inflammatory muscle disorders. J Neurol Sci 1987;82: maintenance regime of prednisolone or combined 229-244. 16. Conaghan PG, Brooks PM, Quinn DI, Day RO: Hazards of therapy is then continued. Intravenous immunogloblow dose methotrexate. Aust NZ J Med 1995;25:670-673. ulin therapy cannot be recommended unless definite 17. Confavreux C, Saddier P, Grimaud J, Moreau T, Adeleine benefit is demonstrated in controlled clinical trials. P, Aimard G: Risk of cancer from azathioprine therapy in multiple sclerosis: a case-control study. Neurology 1996;46:

Table 3 .3Methods of assessing response to treatment in aminers to ensure high intra-and interobserver relia-inflammatory myopathies.Manual muscle testingcient resistance and the technique is not ideal forIsokinetic dynamometryFunctional assessmentquadriceps femoris, particularly in patients with mildTimed testsdegrees of weakness. For such muscle groups fixedFunctional scales Respiratory function assessment Vital capacity Inspiratory/expiratory pressuresstrain gauges and computerized dynamometry allow a more accurate measurement of maximum strength. Isokinetic dynamometry provides a measure ofbility. The use of myometry is limited to those muscleMuscle performance groups to which the examiner is able to provide suffi-Myometry the assessment of force in large muscles such as the torque dynamically through a range of motion at Biochemical studies Serum CK fixed velocity and can also be used for isometric test-Serum myoglobin ing of large limb muscles. 8 With standardization of Interleukin 2 receptors patient position and dynamometer alignment it is

Table 4 .4Details of 15 patients with inflammatory myopathy treated with IVIg.The effect of IVIg was assessed by calculating the % change in the mean myometer score (in Newtons) of a total of 17 muscle groups in upper and lower limbs and neck. Each IVIg course 30 g/day for 3 days. PSS, progressive systemic sclerosis; Pred, prednisolone; Aza, azathioprine; MTX, methotrexate; CyA, cyclosporin; Pen, penicillamine; PMP, pulse methylprednisolone; NS, nonsignificant change; NP, quantitative tests not performed.DurationConcurrentPreviousNo. of% change in meanCase*Diagnosis(years)therapytherapyIVIg coursesmyometer scoresM, 78DM1Pred-2NSMTXCyAF, 68DM6Pred-4NP †MTXF, 45DM1Pred-10NSAzaMTXPenPMPF, 35DMϽ1Pred-2NP †MTXF, 45DMϽ1Pred-1NPMTXF, 31PM8PredAza6ϩ16.6MTXPMPM, 52PSS/PM1PredMTX4ϩ13.8PenF, 31PSS/PM12Pred-8ϩ34.5AzaF, 18PSS/PM1Pred-3ϩ31.5AzaF, 41PSS/PM6PredAza4NP †MTXM, 79IBM16Pred-6NSM, 65IBM6NilPred3NSAzaM, 68IBM17PredAza3NSF, 63IBM10PredAza6ϩ13.2MTXCyAM, 75IBM5NilPred2Ϫ21.4MTX*Gender, age in years. †Not tested quantitatively but improved functionally.

