An inflammatory, familial, inclusion body myositis with autoimmune features and a phenotype identical to sporadic inclusion body myositis Studies in three families

We describe the occurrence of an inflammatory inclusion the presence of the DR3 allele (DRB1*0301/0302) in all seven patients. The combination of the clinical, histological, body myositis in siblings of a single generation in three separate families. The disease in this total of seven patients immunopathological and immunogenetic features indicate that these patients have a disease identical to sporadic was characterized by selective and early involvement of forearm and finger flexors, confirmed by MRI, and inclusion body myositis (s-IBM). We conclude that the classic, inflammatory, s-IBM can also occur in families weakness of the quadriceps, triceps and foot extensors. Muscle biopsies in at least two members from each family (familial inclusion body myositis), in a pattern analogous to the familial occurrence of other autoimmune neuro-showed endomysial inflammation, red-rimmed vacuoles, intracellular amyloid deposition and 15-18-nm tubulo-logical diseases such as myasthenia gravis and multiple sclerosis. These observations strengthen the view that s-IBM filaments within the vacuolated muscle fibres. Immunocytochemistry on serial muscle biopsy sections demonstrated behaves like other autoimmune diseases and has disease susceptibility linked to the DR3 allele. an abundance of CD8ϩ cells invading non-necrotic, MHC-I-expressing muscle fibres. Immunogenetic studies showed

Introduction

Sporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM) is a chronic, heterogenous group of non-inflammatory, red-rimmed vacuolar myopathies that represent various clinical acquired, inflammatory myopathy that (i) usually begins phenotypes which are always distinct from the typical after the age of 50 years, (ii) affects proximal and distal clinical picture of s-IBM (Cole et al., 1988; Klingman muscle groups with a characteristic early involvement of and Gibbs, 1991; Neville et al., 1992;Sadeh et al., 1993; finger flexors and quadriceps muscles and (iii) has Sivakumar and Dalakas, 1996). characteristic histological features of red-rimmed vacuoles

We now describe three separate families in which the containing 15-18-nm tubulofilaments, small intracellular classic clinicohistological picture of s-IBM was observed in amyloid deposits, and primary endomysial inflammation a total of seven siblings. In all families, the disease [familial with CD8ϩ cells and macrophages invading non-necrotic inclusion body myositis (f-IBM)] affected only one muscle fibres (Lotz et al., 1989;Dalakas, 1991;Sekul and generation. Dalakas, 1993;Griggs et al., 1995). In contrast, hereditary inclusion body myopathies (h-IBMs) comprise a 

Family A

biopsies in both patients revealed histological, Two brothers, aged 78 and 73 years and born in the Midwest immunopathological and electron microscopic features of the USA, developed symptoms of proximal and distal typical of s-IBM, as described below. muscle weakness in the lower extremities and frequent falls due to knee-buckling, at the age of 73 and 69 years, respectively. The older brother also developed weakness of the forearm flexors and swallowing difficulties. A muscle

Family B

Two brothers (Fig. 1), aged 69 and 63 years, developed biopsy was diagnostic of IBM (Lotz et al., 1989) and both patients were referred to the NIH (National Institutes of weakness and wasting of the quadriceps muscle and the flexor compartment of the forearm in their mid-fifties. In Health). None of the other family members (Fig. 1) had symptoms of a myopathy. On admission, neurological the older brother, the symptoms began in the lower extremities with frequent falls and weakness in ambulation; examination revealed, in both brothers, wasting and weakness of the quadriceps muscles (Fig. 2), atrophy and weakness of in the younger brother the symptoms began in the upper extremities with weakness of the grip. Subsequently, both the finger flexors and weakness of foot extensors, as classically seen in s-IBM (Dalakas, 1991;Sekul et al., 1994).

brothers developed the classic features of s-IBM with severe involvement of the quadriceps, forearm flexors, triceps and There was no history of myotoxic drug use, infections or any systemic disease. The serum creatine kinase (CK) level foot extensors. No bulbar or respiratory symptoms were noted. By the time the patients were seen at the NIH, was 167 and 426 U/l (normal; 52-386 U/l). An elevated CK the older brother was wheelchair-bound but the younger brother was still ambulatory. Their CK levels were 522 and 980 U/l, respectively. Muscle biopsy in both patients had all the histological and immunopathological features of s-IBM, as described below.

Family C

Three siblings of an African-American family (Fig. 1), two men aged 73 and 69 years and a woman aged 77 years, developed a myopathy with an identical pattern of muscle involvement. The two men developed proximal lower extremity weakness, quadriceps wasting and frequent falls in their early sixties, followed, a few years later, by weakness in the distal muscles of the upper extremities. Muscle biopsy in both male patients showed the typical histological features of s-IBM. Their sister (CI) developed weakness in the lower extremities at the age of 48 years, and developed slowly thereafter weakness and wasting in the proximal and distal muscles of the upper and lower extremities. None of the in all three siblings but was more prominent in the older brother and sister who both had difficulty making a fist (Fig. 3). Overall, in the upper extremities, the weakness was

Special studies

(i) T 1 -weighted MRIs of the thigh muscles were performed predominantly distal but both the proximal and the distal muscles were equally affected in the lower extremities. Mild in Family C, to confirm the selective and prominent involvement of the knee extensor muscles. The MRIs of facial-and neck-flexor weakness were present in all three patients. When seen at the NIH, the older brother (CII) had the quadriceps were compared with the studies previously performed in patients with s-IBM and h-IBM (Sivakumar also developed dysphagia. CK levels were 359 and 434 in the men and 124 U/l in the woman. As described below, the and Dalakas, 1996).

(ii) Open muscle biopsies were performed and processed previous and repeated biopsies in the two brothers revealed features identical to those seen in patients with s-IBM.

for muscle-enzyme histochemistry and Congo-red staining.

Glutaradehyde-fixed and Epon-embedded tissue as well as frozen sections (Askanas et al., 1991) were used for electron microscopy. In addition, immunocytochemistry was performed on serial, 5-µm sections, of the muscle biopsy specimens, utilizing monoclonal antibodies directed against major histocompatability complex (MHC) class I antigen, CD8ϩ cells, macrophages, CD4ϩ cells and Natural Killer cells (Leu 19) in an immunoperoxidase technique, as described by Illa et al. (1992). Disease control biopsies, run concurrently with the above sections, included muscle specimens from a patient with typical histological features of s-IBM and a patient with the autosomal dominant form of h-IBM (Sivakumar and Dalakas, 1996).

(iii) Histocompatability leukocyte antigen (HLA) Class II genotyping was performed using PCR (polymerase chain reaction) amplification with sequence-specific primers (Park and Tonai, 1992) to determine if the predominance of DR3 haplotype, seen in patients with s-IBM (Garlepp et al., 1994), was also present in the studied patients.

(iv) Complete haematological, biochemical and serological studies were performed including a search for anti-nuclear antibodies, and antibodies against double-stranded DNA, ribonucleoprotein, Jo-1, SS-A and SS-B.

Results

MRI findings

MRI performed in one family showed that the extensor compartment of the thighs was more significantly involved than the flexor compartment (Fig. 4), as typically seen in s-IBM (Sekul and Dalakas, 1993). The same pattern was seen clinically as marked wasting of the quadriceps muscle in the other two families (Fig. 2). In Patient II of Family C, who had advanced disease, the flexor compartment was also involved (Fig. 4).

Histology

The muscle biopsies on all patients showed a myopathy with variation of fibre size, hypertrophic and small fibres, and increased connective tissue. Red-rimmed vacuoles, intramyofibre amyloid deposits, ragged-red fibres and primary Family C (Fig. 5). Patient CII had two muscle biopsies, one due to fatty replacement. The third member of this family (Patient CII), with advanced, end-stage disease, has involvement of both from the least affected deltoid muscle that showed nonthe quadriceps and the hamstring muscle groups. specific myopathic features and another from the more affected quadriceps muscle that showed all the diagnostic 15-18 nm diameter tubulofilaments were observed in the features of an inflammatory inclusion body myositis, as noted muscle biopsy of at least one representative member (AI, above. In Patient CI, who had the same typical phenotype AII, BII and CIII) from each family (Fig. 5). of s-IBM as her two brothers (Figs 3 and 4), muscle biopsy performed from the least affected deltoid muscle revealed non-specific myopathic features, similar to the deltoid muscle

Immunocytochemistry

The predominant endomysial cells were CD8ϩ cells which biopsy of her brother (CII) (probable IBM). However, she did not receive any further biopsies. By electron microscopy, surrounded or invaded non-necrotic and MHC-I antigen-Fig. 5 Cross-section of a trichromatically stained muscle biopsy from Patient AI (A) shows primary endomysial inflammation and vacuolated fibres (ϫ425). Electron microscopy, performed of a redrimmed-vacuolated muscle fibre of the same patient, identified by the Gomori trichrome stain (B inset, ϫ400), reveals the characteristic tubulofilaments of 15-18 nm diameter (ϫ30 000, bar represents 160 nm).

expressing muscle fibres (Fig. 6). The other cells were (Fig. 7A and B), as previously described (Sivakumar and Dalakas, 1996). macrophages and CD4ϩ cells. Natural killer cells were not detected. The MHC class I antigen was expressed in most fibres, even in areas without inflammation (Fig. 6B), in a pattern identical to the one seen in s-IBM (Engel and Arahata,

Immunogenetic studies.

1984). In contrast, in the concurrently stained sections of a

The DRB1*0301/0302 allele corresponding to the DR3 haplotype was seen in all affected members (Table 1). No patient with h-IBM, MHC class I antigen was not expressed autoantibodies were detected, except for a positive anti-These observations indicate that the typical s-IBM, with immunopathological features of an autoimmune process, can nuclear antibody titre (1:160), with a speckled pattern, observed in the older brother of Family A (Patient A1).

be also familial, affecting more than one sibling of a generation.

The observed familial occurrence of an inflammatory, and probably autoimmune, inclusion body myositis (f-IBM) needs

Discussion

to be distinguished from the hereditary inclusion body At least two siblings in three different families had the myopathies (h-IBM), a heterogenous group of vacuolar typical clinical phenotype and the radiological, histological, myopathies without inflammatory or immunopathological ultrastructural and inflammatory features of s-IBM with features that often occur in more than one generation of a prominent endomysial CD8ϩ cytotoxic T cells invading MHC class I antigen-expressing non-necrotic muscle fibres.

family, or have predilection for certain ethnic groups (Askanas and Engel, 1995;Sivakumar and Dalakas, 1996). Although pernicious anaemia and common variable immunodeficiency, while other autoimmune diseases including autoimmune the phenotype of patients with h-IBM is variable (Sivakumar and Dalakas, 1996), these patients do not have the selective thyroiditis, myasthenia gravis and pernicious anaemia can occur in their relatives (Rugero et al., 1995). Some siblings pattern of involvement of the quadriceps and the long finger flexor muscles, as typically seen in s-IBM.

or relatives of patients with neurological diseases of putative or definite autoimmune origin, e.g. multiple sclerosis, The immunopathological features observed in the present familial cases are identical to those seen in s-IBM and in myasthenia gravis and polymyositis (Cook et al., 1963;Leukonia and Buxton, 1973), also demonstrate a variety polymyositis where an autoimmune pathogenesis has been strongly considered (Engel and Arahata, 1984;Engel et al., of autoantibodies and develop an unrelated (or the same) autoimmune disease. The present observations that IBM with 1994). s-IBM has been associated with other autoimmune conditions, e.g. Sjogrens disease, dermatitis herpetiformis, prominent inflammatory features can also occur in siblings,

Table 1 Alleles in HLA II antigens seen in affected

The observed similarities between inflammatory f-IBM siblings of inflammatory f-IBM and s-IBM, prompted us to treat the f-IBM with the same therapeutic strategies used in s-IBM. Many autoimmune diseases have been associated with a particular HLA antigen and the susceptibility to autoimmunity Cole AJ, Kuzniecky R, Karpati G, Carpenter S, Andermann E, has been linked to various MHC-associated genes. In Andermann F. Familial myopathy with changes resembling inclusion polymyositis and dermatomyositis, there is a high incidence body myositis and periventricular leucoencephalopathy. Brain 1988;111: 1025-37. (42%) of the DR3 phenotype (Love, 1989). A very significant (92%) incidence of the HLA DR3 phenotype, com-Cook CD, Rosen FS, Banker BQ. Dermatomyositis and focal pared with 25% in the control population, has been found in scleroderma. Pediatr Clin North Am 1963; 10: 979-1016. s-IBM (Garlepp et al., 1994). We also found the same strong as autoimmune hepatitis, agranulocytosis and inflammatory bowel disease (Satsangi et al., 1996), the noted association Engel AG, Arahata K. Monoclonal antibody analysis of mononuclear cells in myopathies. II: phenotypes of autoinvasive cells in polysuggests that the sporadic and the familial forms of inflammyositis and inclusion body myositis. Ann Neurol 1984;16: 209-15. matory IBM share the same inherited determinants of susceptibility to the inflammatory process. Based on the clinicopathological and immunogenetic features of our patients with f-IBM, which resemble the s-Jacob CO, Fronek Z, Lewis GD, Koo M, Hansen JA, McDevitt HO. Heritable major histocompatibility complex class II-associated IBM, we have argued that the pathogenesis may be related differences in production of tumor necrosis factor-α: relevance to to an increased genetic susceptibility to the autoimmune genetic predisposition to systemic lupus erythematosus. Proc Natl process. However, because of the possibility that members Acad Sci USA 1990;87: 1233-7 in the next generation may also develop the same lateonset disease, other modes of disease inheritance cannot be Klingman JG, Gibbs MA. Familial inclusion body myositis [abstract]. Neurology 1991; 41 Suppl 1: 275. excluded.

Fig. 11Fig.1Pedigrees of Families A-C. In each family there are two (Families A and B) or three (Family C) siblings in only one generation affected with inflammatory IBM that presented with a phenotype identical to s-IBM.

Fig. 22Fig. 2 Photographs of anterior thighs in siblings with inflammatory IBM. Two brothers from Family A demonstrate the selective atrophy of the quadriceps muscle, as typically seen in s-IBM.

Fig. 33Fig. 3 Photographs of forearms and hands in siblings with

Fig. 44Fig. 4 T 1 -weighted MRIs of the thighs in siblings with

Fig. 66Fig. 6 Endomysial CD8ϩ cells in the MHC class I antigen-expressing muscle fibres in f-IBM. Serial sections of a muscle biopsy from Patient BI of Family B immunostained with antibodies to CD8ϩ cells (A) and MHC class I antigen (B) (ϫ425). CD8ϩ cells invade MHC-I-expressing muscle fibres. In addition, MHC-I is present in fibres not surrounded by cells.

Fig. 77Fig. 7 Expression of MHC class I antigen in low-magnification field in the muscle biopsies of patients with f-IBM (A) compared with h-IBM (B). Muscle biopsy of Patient CIII immunostained for MHC-I(A) demonstrates the ubiquitous expression of the MHC-I antigen in many fibres. Several foci of inflammatory cells invading these fibres are also noted (ϫ270). In a concurrently immunostained section from a control patient with h-IBM (B), no MHC-I-stained fibres are seen (ϫ350).

