lnterleukin-1 expression in inflammatory myopathies: evidence of marked immunoreactivity in sarcoid granulomas and muscle fibres showing ischaemic and regenerative changes

Interleukin-1 expression in inflammatory myopathies: evidence of marked immunoreactivity in sarcoid granulomas and muscle fibres showing ischaemic and regenerative changes

The most frequent autoimmune adult inflammatory myopathies are dermatomyositis, polymyositis, inclusion body myositis, and sarcoid myopathy. Interleukin-1 (IL-1) is a pleiotropic molecule, implicated in the inflammatory process, but also in tissue protection and remodelling. We evaluated the immunocytochemical expression of IL-1 and in frozen muscle biopsy specimens from patients with dermatomyositis (15 cases), polymyositis (five cases), inclusion body myositis (five cases) and sarcoid myopathy (five cases). Positive immunoreactivities, were observed in both inflammatory cells and muscle fibres. Specificity of the immunostaining was assessed by Western blot experiments. IL-1 positive inflammatory cells were rare in polymyositis and inclusion body myositis, moderately abundant in dermatomyositis, and prominent in sarcoid myopathy granulomas.

In sarcoid myopathy, 24.6 4.1% inflammatory cells were IL-1 -positive and 45.2 2.6% were IL-1positive. IL-1 positive muscle fibres were mainly observed in dermatomyositis, usually remote from inflammatory infiltrates. Positive immunostaining for IL-1 was observed in fibres showing ischaemic punched-out vacuoles, that correspond to areas of myosinolysis, in atrophic perifascicular fibres, and in fibres located within healing microinfarcts. All NCAM-positive regenerating fibres were IL-1 positive. We conclude that: (i) IL-1 is expressed in granulomas of sarcoid myopathy, which is in keeping with the role ascribed to IL-1 in the formation of granulomas; (ii) IL-1 is expressed by muscle fibres undergoing ischaemic damage; and (iii) IL-1 expression by muscle fibres is associated with myofibrillar protein breakdown and regeneration.

Introduction

The most frequent autoimmune inflammatory myopathies in adults are dermatomyositis, polymyositis, inclusion body myositis, and sarcoid myopathy. Dermatomyositis is primarily a humorally mediated microvascular disease associated with inflammatory infiltrates composed of both B and T cells and ischaemic muscle injury assessed by focal myofibrillar loss in individual muscle cells, perifascicular muscle atrophy, and microinfarcts [9]. In contrast, polymyositis and inclusion body myositis are primarily muscle diseases associated with a CD8 T-cell cytotoxicity directed towards muscle fibres [9]. In addition, inclusion body myositis is characterized by muscle fibres containing rimmed vacuoles and intracellular -amyloid deposits [27]. Sarcoid myopathy is characterized by the presence of non-caseating epithelioid granulomas in muscle tissue [5], in patients with sarcoidosis.

The interleukin-1 (IL-1) family includes IL-1 and IL-1 , two active molecules, and IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra), a structural analogue without biological activity. IL-1 is mainly produced by monocyte/ macrophages, but is also produced by T-lymphocytes and a number of other cells and tissues [16]. Immunoreactivity of IL-1 has been reported in normal [8,21,30] and diseased muscle fibres [21,31]. IL-1 , IL-1 , and the IL-1 converting enzyme that cleaves proIL-1 into active IL-1 accumulate or are localized in mitochondria [7,21,32]. Interleukin-1 is a pleiotropic molecule, implicated in the inflammatory process, but also in tissue protection and remodelling [17]. Several biological effects of IL-1 might be relevant to the pathogenesis of inflammatory myopathies. IL-1 is important in the initiation of T-cell mediated immune responses [17] and the IL-1 system has been implicated in the pathogenesis of polymyositis [20,33]. IL-1 is produced by skeletal muscle in response to ischaemia [1] and could be a mediator of muscle proteolysis [4,6,12,19,25,37,38]. IL-1 upregulates the expression and processing of -amyloid precursor protein and is to be likely implicated in the -amyloid deposition process in Alzheimer's disease [22]. Finally, IL-1 has been implicated in the formation of inflammatory granulomas [14].

For these reasons we evaluated the immunocytochemical expression of IL-1 and in muscle biopsy specimens from patients with dermatomyositis, polymyositis, inclusion body myositis and sarcoid myopathy.

Materials and methods

Patients

We studied deltoid muscle biopsy samples from patients with dermatomyositis (15 cases), polymyositis (five cases), inclusion body myositis (five cases), and sarcoid myopathy (five cases). Three subgroups of dermatomyositis were distinguished on the grounds of histological findings: a subgroup of five patients had vacuoles corresponding to punched-out areas of myofibrillar loss as the major histological change (DMv); a subgroup of five patients had prominent perifascicular atrophy (DMa); and a subgroup of five patients had multiple microinfarcts at a healing stage (DMi). Ischaemic punched-out vacuoles, that correspond to foci of myosinolysis, were defined by the presence of vacuoles lacking ATP-ase activity. Perifascicular atrophy was defined as peripheral regions of muscle fascicles composed of muscle fibres with a cross-sectional area substantially lower than that of muscle fibres in the rest of the fascicle. Healing microinfarcts in muscle were defined as lesions of numerous contiguous fibres within a fascicle, all affected fibres being at the same stage of regeneration. Contiguous vacuolated fibres were excluded from the analysis of DMi group. No patient was treated with steroids or was under intensive care on or near the date of biopsy. Muscle biopsy specimens from five individuals with normal muscle histology were studied for comparison.

Methods

Histochemistry

Muscle samples were conventionally processed for haematoxylin and eosin, Masson's trichrome, ATPase (at pH 9.4, 4.6 and 4.3), NADH-tetrazolium reductase, succinate dehydrogenase, and cytochrome c oxidase histoenzymatic reactions. Immunocytochemistry was performed on serial 8 m frozen sections, using an immunoalkaline phosphatase assay. Immunophenotyping of inflammatory cells was performed as previously described [21]. An antibody against desmin (Dako, 1/50, Dakopatts, Glostrup, Denmark) was used to detect muscle fibres within granulomas. Antibodies against the 135 kDa isoform of the neural cell adhesion molecule (NKH1/NCAM, Dako CD 56 T199, 1/20) were used for recognition of regenerating fibres [23]. Expressions of IL-1 and IL-1 were evaluated on consecutive sections using rabbit polyclonal antibodies against human IL-1 and IL-1 purchased from Genzyme (Cambridge, MA, USA). Antibodies were diluted in PBS containing 0.1% BSA. After fixation in ice-cold acetone, the histochemical procedure was carried out at room temperature as follows: (i) blocking of non-specific sites with PBS-BSA 2%; (ii) incubation with the primary anti-IL-1 antibodies (1/25, 1/50, 1/100, 1/250) for 60 mn; (iii) link-step with a mouse anti-rabbit immunoglobulins antibody IL-1 in inflammatory myopathies 133 (APAAP, 1/50, 30 mn) and then a rabbit anti-mouse immunoglobulins antibody (1/50, 30 mn); (iv) incubation with an alkaline phosphatase-labelled mouse anti-alkaline phosphatase (1/50, 30 mn). Visualization was performed using a Fast Red (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA) solution (20 mn). The reactions were performed with and without amplification by repetition of the link-step and the incubation with APAAP. Specimens were mounted after counterstaining (10 s) with Harris haematoxylin. To assess the specificity of immunostaining, the procedure was performed without primary antibody and with a non-relevant antibody from the same species.

Immunoblotting analysis

Frozen muscle samples were homogenized in extraction buffer (Tris HCl 62.5 mM, pH 6.8; 2 mM EDTA; 0.5% Triton 100; 2.3% SDS; 2 mM PMSF) and total amount of protein was determined using the BCA kit from Pierce (Rockford, IL, USA). Aliquots corresponding to about 100 g of proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE on 14% polyacrylamide mini-slab gels and were transferred electrophoretically on to a nitrocellulose membrane (Sigma) for 1 h at 30 V in 0.01 mM Tris-0.19 M glycine-20% ethanol. Controls were normal muscle and recombinant human IL-1 (Genzyme). The nitrocellulose membrane was soaked in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) containing 3% mouse serum, 5% dry non-fat milk and 0.1% Tween 20. The blotted membrane was sequentially treated at room temperature with: (i) the anti-human IL-1 antibodies used for immunohistochemistry (1/100; in PBS-0.1% Tween 20); (ii) monoclonal biotinylated mouse anti-rabbit immunoglobulins antibody (Sigma) 1/1000 (diluent: PBS-0.1% Tween 20); (iii) streptavidin-biotin-horseradish peroxidase conjugate (Amersham Corp, Arlington Heights, IL, USA) 1/500 (diluent: PBS-0.1% Tween 20). Visualization of immunolabelling was performed using the ECL reagents (Amersham). Assessment of non-specific binding of the secondary antibody was performed by omitting the anti-IL-1 antibody. Western-blot analysis was performed on tissue extracts of immunoreactive muscles, from two patients with sarcoid myopathy and from one with dermatomyositis with predominently vacuolated fibres. Normal muscle extracts were used as controls.

Morphometry

Quantification of IL-1-immunoreactivity in inflammatory cells

Quantification was carried out at a 400 magnification. Cells were designated as labelled or non-labelled on a ' ' basis. In SM cases, 2916 264 inflammatory cells were evaluated (mean SEM).

Quantification of IL-1-immunoreactivity in muscle fibres

Expressions of IL-1 and IL-1 were evaluated in at least 200 fibres per case, and classified as present or absent. In addition, evaluation focused on the predominant myopathological abnormality in each group of patients with dermatomyositis: 15-93 vacuolated fibres were evaluated in patients from the DMv group, 100 fibres from the outer layer of fascicles showing perifascicular atrophy were evaluated in each patient from DMa group, and 50-87 fibres within healing microinfarcts were evaluated in patients from DMi group.

Statistics

Statistical processing of numerical data was achieved with Kruskall-Wallis ANOVA and Mann-Whitney Utests, using InStat 2.00 software (GraphPad Software, 1993). A P-value <0.05 was considered significant.

Results

In normal muscles, IL-1 immunoreactivity was confined to the post-synaptic domain of motor endplates, as previously reported [21]. In diseased muscles, immunoreactivity was observed in vessels, inflammatory cells, and muscle fibres. Immunoblotting performed on dermatomyositis muscle samples showed that the anti-IL-1 antibody reacted with a protein of 17 kDa, corresponding to the weight of IL-1 (Figure 1).

Vessels

Immunoreactivities for IL-1 and IL-1 were observed in both endothelial cells and vascular smooth muscle cells in all cases of dermatomyositis, polymyositis, inclusion body myositis, and sarcoid myopathy.

Inflammatory cells

Numerous positive cells were observed in sarcoid granulomas. Conspicuous labelling was observed with minimal background at a concentration of 1/100 without amplification with both antibodies (Figure 3b,c,d). IL-1-positive inflammatory cells were also observed in endomysium remote from granulomas, and in rare inflammatory cells invading muscle fibres. Some multinucleated cells within intrafascicular granulomas were positive for desmin; these cells were thought to derive from engulfed muscle fibres (Figure 3a). The rare muscles fibres invaded by inflammatory cells did not express concommitant sarcoplasmic IL-1 immunoreactivity. IL-1 -positive cells (24.6 4.1%) were less abundant than IL-1 -positive cells (45.2 2.6%) (Figure 2). The density of inflammatory cells correlated positively with the density of IL-1 positive cells (P<0.001), but not with that of IL-1 -positive cells. While IL-1 immunoreactivities were usually moderate, two populations of IL-1 -positive inflammatory cells were observed. Most IL-1 -positive cells were moderately stained and homogeneously distributed in the infiltrates; they corresponded to macrophages and epithelioid cells. Less than 10% of IL-1 positive cells were strongly immunoreactive. They were selectively localized at the periphery of granulomas and in endomysium, and co-localized with T-cells (Figure 3b). Multinucleated cells were usually negative or weakly positive (Figure 3b).

In dermatomyositis, 19.1 2.1% inflammatory cells were IL-1 -positive and 19.7 1.8 were IL-1positive (Figure 2). Most positive cells appeared to be macrophages.

The percentage of IL-1-positive inflammatory cells in polymyositis and inclusion body myositis was significantly lower than in dermatomyositis (respectively P=0.0002 and P=0.01) (Figure 2). The proportion of positive cells was 1.0 0.5% for IL-1 and 4.0 1.1% for IL-1 in polymyositis and 0% for IL-1 and 9.2 1.9% for IL-1 in inclusion body myositis.

Muscle fibres

Muscle fibres positive for IL-1 and IL-1 were observed in all patients with dermatomyositis (Figure 4b,c). They were selectively observed in ischaemic areas, close or, more frequently, remote from inflammatory infiltrates. Immunoreactivities persisted using a 1/250 dilution of primary antibodies, without amplification.

In the DMv subgroup, 100% of vacuolated fibres showed immunostaining for both IL-1 and IL-1 . Staining was granular and tended to predominate around empty punched-out vacuoles or sarcolemmal areas showing myosin loss (Figure 4b).

In the DMa subgroup, IL-1 was detected in 73.4 3.4% (range: 67-83%) of atrophic perifascicular fibres from the outer layer, and IL-1 in 56.6 9.7%  

. PM, polymyositis (n=5). IBM, inclusion body myositis (n=5). SM, sarcoid myopathy (n=5). Percentages are expressed as means SEM. The percentage of IL-1 -positive inflammatory cells is higher in DM than in PM (P=0.0002), and that of IL-1 -positive inflammatory cells higher in DM than in PM and in IBM (P=0.0002, P=0.01, respectively). (range: 28-88%). Although marginal fibres usually showed the most pronounced positivity, immunoreactivity was also observed in atrophic fibres in deeper perifascicular layers.

IL-1 in inflammatory myopathies

In the DMi subgroup, IL-1 was detected in 43 19.21% (range: 19-60%) of fibres within microinfarcts, and IL-1 in 34 9.3% (range: 19-44%). In all three groups occasional isolated fibres were immunoreactive for IL-1 and IL-1 within muscle fascicles. For example, in DMv, 14 11.7% (range: 2-28%) of non-vacuolated fibres were positive for IL-1 , and 14.2 13.7% (range: 3-36%) were positive for IL-1 . Most of these fibres were atrophic. All fibres that expressed the regeneration marker NKH1/NCAM, expressed IL-1 and/or IL-1 , whatever their location. A number of IL-1 -or IL-1 -positive fibres, however, did not express NKH1/NCAM (Figure 4c,d). Some muscle fibres positive for IL-1 were observed around granulomas in sarcoid myopathy (Figure 3c,d) and in polymyositis. Interestingly, in inclusion body myositis, vacuolated muscle fibres were negative for IL-1 or IL-1 (Figure 4a).

Discussion

In the present study, IL-1 positive inflammatory cells were abundant in sarcoid myopathy granulomas, sparse in dermatomyositis, and rare or absent in polymyositis and in inclusion body myositis. IL-1-positive muscle fibres were conspicuously present in dermatomyositis, and included all vacuolated fibres, most fibres in atrophic perifascicular regions and in healing microinfarcts, and all NKH1/NCAM positive, i.e. regenerating, muscle fibres. A previous study failed to detect IL-1 immunoreactivity in one case of sarcoid myopathy [31], but both IL-1 peptides and their mRNAs were detected in sarcoid granulomas in lymph nodes [15]. In our patients, IL-1positive cells were more abundant than IL-1 -positive cells, as previously documented by in situ hybridization of IL-1 mRNAs in lymph nodes [15]. Most IL-1 positive cells were macrophages and epithelioid cells. Multinucleated giant cells, however, were negative or weakly stained, suggesting a post-fusional fading of IL-1 expression, as previously documented [11]. This unexplained phenomenon remains, but suggests a role for IL-1 in the cell fusion process. Some strongly IL-1 -positive lymphocytes were located at the periphery of granulomas. Under experimental conditions, expression of IL-1 mRNA is found in clusters of monocytes before the formation of granulomas [36]. The decreasing expression of IL-1 from the periphery to the centre of granulomas observed in our patients was consistent with the role ascribed to IL-1 in the early recruitment stages of cells implicated in the granulomatous process [10].

IL-1-positive muscle fibres were mainly observed in vacuolated, atrophic, and post-ischaemic regenerating muscle fibres in dermatomyositis. The immunocytochemical expression of IL-1 by human muscle fibres was rarely reported [8,21,30,31]. The finding of immunoreactivities for both IL-1 and IL-1 , the persistence of the immunostaining in a 1/250 dilution without amplification, the western blot analysis, and the previously reported detection of IL-1 mRNA by in situ hybridization in AZT-fibres, make it very likely that the IL-1 immunoreactivities observed in muscle fibres were specific reactions.

In experimental muscle ischaemia in dogs, increased levels of IL-1 were observed in the venous effluent blood during the reperfusion phase [1]. Distribution of IL-1expressing fibres in our patients strongly suggested that ischaemia could be the direct cause of IL-1 and IL-1 expression in muscle fibres. Expression of IL-1 mRNA has been observed in ischaemic areas in non-muscular tissue  such as brain tissue [35], and IL-1 was involved in tissue protection processes triggered by the ischaemic stress [34]. Ischaemic vacuoles correspond to focal myosinolysis [24]. We have previously made the hypothesis that expression of IL-1 in atrophic muscle fibres showing thick myofilamentous loss may be explained by the possible implication of IL-1 in myofilamentous protein degradation [21]. IL-1 can induce atrophy of human myocytes in culture [25] and muscle proteolysis [6,12]. IL-1-induced muscle proteolysis affects myofibrillar proteins and is mediated by a mechanism distinct from that of corticosteroid-induced proteolysis [38]. Another striking finding was the constant expression of IL-1 in regenerating muscle cells expressing NKH-1/NCAM. NCAM-positive muscle fibres are commonly observed in ischaemic areas of muscles of patients with dermatomyositis [18]. The finding of IL-1 expression in regenerating fibres, is in accordance with our observation of IL-1 immunoreactivities and mRNA expression in cultures of non-stimulated normal human myoblasts at time of myotube formation [3]. These data suggest that IL-1 production is constitutive during the myogenic process.

As shown in previous studies on cytokine expression in inflammatory myopathies, expression of IL-1 in inflammatory cells of dermatomyositis, polymyositis, and inclusion body myositis were neither as high nor as frequent as it could be expected [26,31]. IL-1-positive inflammatory cells were rare in polymyositis and in inclusion body myositis, although potent cellular sources of IL-1 such as macrophages and CD8+ cells are found in a ratio of 1 to 2-3 in polymyositis [18]. Since increased circulating levels of IL-1 have been observed at the initial stage of acute polymyositis [33], it is possible that expression of IL-1 in our patients was already downregulated at time of biopsy. In contrast with a previous study [31], IL-1-positive fibres were not detected in inclusion body myositis. Admittedly our cases had a small number of muscle fibres with rimmed vacuoles. Because of the stimulatory effect of IL-1 on expression of the -amyloid precursor protein gene, further studies are needed to clarify this point.

The percentages of IL-1 -and IL-1 -positive inflammatory cells were significantly higher in dermatomyositis than in polymyositis and inclusion body myositis. Most of these IL-1-positive cells were macrophages that are usually found in inflammatory infiltrates of dermatomyositis [24]. Both IL-1 and IL-1 induce their own production as well as the expression of other cytokines such as IL-2, IL-6, and TNF [17]. Therefore, inflammatory cells and muscle fibres may interact to increase their respective production in dermatomyositis. However, the absence of accumulation of inflammatory cells in the vicinity of IL-1 positive muscle fibres suggested that IL-1 produced by muscle fibres did not stimulate tissue inflammation but was rather involved in the mechanisms of cellular protection and regeneration [17]. In fact, one of the puzzling characteristics of IL-1 is that its release outside the cells does not occur through a conventional process [28], as assessed by the lack of the signal peptide, an hydrophobic secretory sequence required for the transport of proteins through the Golgi complex [2]. Subsequently, alternate mechanisms of secretion have been suggested, including disruption of the cell membrane [28]. According to the discrepancy between the strong pro-inflammatory properties of IL-1 and the lack of inflammation near IL-1 expressing muscle fibres, it is assumed that most IL-1 produced by muscle fibres remains in the cell. Such a cell compartmentalization of IL-1 production was previously evidenced in keratinocytes [13]. Moreover, a study of IL-1 production by cultured rat vascular smooth muscle cells did not provide evidence of IL-1-release in the supernatant [29]. These data suggest that muscle cellrestricted IL-1 may have a key role in cell regeneration and in repair of diseased muscles.

We conclude that: (i) IL-1 is expressed in sarcoid myopathy granulomas; (ii) IL-1 is expressed by muscles fibres undergoing an ischaemic damage; and (iii) IL-1 expression by muscle fibres seems to be associated with myofibrillar protein breakdown and with regeneration.

Acknowledgements

This study was supported by grants to R. K. Gherardi from ANRS, and by a Fellowship to F. J. Authier from Sidaction (Fondation Pour La Recherche Médicale) and to B. Chazaud from AFM (Association Française contre les Myopathies).

Figure 1 .1Figure1. Immunoblotting analysis. Total extract of one normal muscle (CTL) and of one dermatomyositis (DM) muscle, and human recombinant IL-1 (rhIL-1 ) were processed for immunoblotting using a polyclonal anti-IL-1 antibody. Immunoreactivity was observed in dermatomyositis at a molecular weight corresponding to that of rhIL-1 . The indication of 18.5 kDa (arrow) is that of the commercial molecular weight standard.

Figure 2 .2Figure 2. Percentage of IL-1 -positive (open bars) inflammatory cells and of IL-1 -positive (solid bars) inflammatory cells in idiopathic inflammatory myopathies. DM, dermatomyositis(n=15). PM, polymyositis (n=5). IBM, inclusion body myositis (n=5). SM, sarcoid myopathy (n=5). Percentages are expressed as means SEM. The percentage of IL-1 -positive inflammatory cells is higher in DM than in PM (P=0.0002), and that of IL-1 -positive inflammatory cells higher in DM than in PM and in IBM (P=0.0002, P=0.01, respectively).

Figure 3 .3Figure 3. Sarcoid myopathy. a, Positive immunostaining of desmin in a multinucleated cell in the centre of an intrafascicular granuloma suggesting derivation from a muscle fibre engulfed in the granuloma. b, Immunostaining of IL-1 in a septal granuloma, showing strongly immunoreactive cells (arrowhead), and poorly stained multinucleated cells (arrow). c,d, Immunostaining of IL-1 (c) and of IL-1 (d) in an intrafascicular granuloma, showing some immunoreactive muscle cells (arrow). 480.

Figure 4 .4Figure 4. Inclusion body myositis. a, Immunostaining of IL-1 , showing positive inflammatory cells invading muscle fibres (arrows). The rimmed vacuoles of the vacuolated contiguous fibres are not labelled. 1200. Dermatomyositis (b-d). b, Immunostaining of IL-1 showing positive diseased muscle fibres in ischaemic areas of muscle. c,d, Co-localization of IL-1 (c) and NCAM/NKH1 (d) in regenerating muscle fibres. 480.

135 1997 Blackwell Science Ltd, Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology, 23, 132-140 13652990, 1997, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1365-2990.1997.tb01195.x by University Of Illinois At Urbana Champaign, Wiley Online Library on [10/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

IL-1 in inflammatory myopathies 137 1997 Blackwell Science Ltd, Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology, 23, 132-140 13652990, 1997, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1365-2990.1997.tb01195.x by University Of Illinois At Urbana Champaign, Wiley Online Library on [10/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

