Inflammatory myopathies and systemic disorders: a review of immunopathogenetic mechanisms and clinical features

Introduction

Myositis is a general term indicating muscle inflammation, the aetiology may be known (viral, bacterial or parasitic) or unknown (idiopathic). The inflammatory myopathies (IM) form a heterogeneous group of subacute/ chronic muscle disorders, sharing a common and characterizing feature: muscle degeneration mediated by inflammatory processes [19,20,26]. This review will be concerned with the main clinical and pathogenetic features of the following diseases:

1. Idiopathic IM: (a) polymyositis (PM); (b) dermatomyositis (DM); (c) inclusion body myositis (IBM) 2. IM associated with systemic disorders: (a) IM associated with malignancies; (b) overlap syndromes: scleroderma-myositis, Sjögren's syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus-myositis (SLE), rheumatoid arthritis-myositis and mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD); (c) retrovirus related muscle disease: IM associated with HIV, HTLV-1 or zidovudine (AZT).

Pathogenetic mechanisms

PM and DM are considered to be autoimmune diseases on the basis of the following features: frequent association with other autoimmune diseases, T-lymphocyte-mediated muscle damage at the endomysial level in PM, complement-mediated angiopathy in DM, serum positivity for autoantibodies and positive response to immunosuppressive treatments in both [7,20,26,50]. The pathogenetic mechanisms of IBM remain unclear, although recent characterization of the content of the inclusion bodies has considerably increased understanding of this condition [5].

The inflammatory myopathies are all characterized by the presence of mononuclear cell infiltrates in muscle tissue (Fig. 1A). The inflammatory reaction involves both "effector" lymphoid cells (T or B lymphocytes, macrophages and natural killer cells) and "target" muscle cells [4,25]. The infiltrating cells have been characterized by immunocytochemical methods, and recent developments in molecular immunology have further expanded our understanding of immune cell function, activation, and cellcell communication in IM. Despite intense efforts, however, no target antigens have yet been identified; the causative agents in all these conditions are still unknown.

Abstract

The inflammatory myopathies are a heterogeneous group of muscle diseases characterized by muscle degeneration mediated by inflammatory processes. They may be idiopathic, as in polymyositis, dermatomyositis and inclusion body myositis, or associated with systemic disorders such as malignancies, overlap syndromes, and retroviral infection. The pathogenesis of each dis-ease is discussed together with more recent molecular and cellular immunology findings. Salient diagnostic, clinical and pharmacological features are also reviewed.

Immunopathological features of effector cells in idiopathic IM

In PM cellular infiltrates are present at the level of the endomysium; they surround and invade single non-necrotic muscle fibres (Fig. 1B), eventually leading to muscle cell degeneration and necrosis. The infiltrates are mainly composed of cytotoxic (CD8 + ) T lymphocytes (Fig. 1C) and macrophages [4, 25,43]; the immunocytochemical data suggest a cytotoxic cell-mediated activity against an antigen (Ag) expressed by muscle fibres. In order to test this autoimmune hypothesis, Hohlfeld and Engel [31] derived CD8 + and CD4 + (helper) T-cell lines from muscle biopsies of PM, and also from IBM and DM patients, and found cytotoxic activity against autologous myotubes in all three diseases. This activity, measured by in vitro co-cultures of autologous lymphocytes with muscle cells, was low but significant, indicating specific involvement of these T cells in myocytotoxicity.

The vast majority of T lymphocytes involved in myocytotoxicity have been shown to express α/β T-cell receptors (TCRs) on their surfaces [9]. Since T lymphocytes recognize an Ag via the TCR, characterization of the latter may provide clues as to the pathogenesis of the disease. The TCR is an α/β (or γ/δ) heterodimer whose phenotypic expression derives from rearrangements of the variable (V), diversity (D), joining (J) and constant (C) segments of the TCR gene [51]. TCR gene rearrangement is the basic mechanism by which T lymphocytes achieve antigen specificity. The TCR contact region with an Agpresented by a major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I or II molecule -is called complementarity determining region 3 (CDR3) and lies on products of V-J and V-D-J segment rearrangements of the α and β TCR chains respectively [15]. CDR3 sequences are considered to be key elements for showing whether an Ag or superantigen determines the TCR repertoire.

We analysed the TCR repertoire of infiltrating T lymphocytes in muscle biopsies from PM patients and found oligoclonality (high frequency of Vβ1, Vβ15, Vα1 and Vα5) as well as restricted CDR3 usage (Jβ2.1 restricted usage and a consensus motif detected in the N-D-N region). These findings suggest recruitment of T cells in the inflamed areas of affected muscles in PM due to the presence of a conventional Ag expressed on the surface of muscle cells [43]. The preferential expression of Vα/β TCR families and the clonality of the CDR3 region were subsequently confirmed by other authors [9,52]. By combining the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique with double-fluorescence immunocytochemistry, Bender et al. [9] demonstrated that Vβ13.1 + and Vβ3 + T lymphocytes were preferentially expressed in PM muscles with a conserved consensus sequence in the CDR3 region, and that 70% of these T cells were CD8 + muscle-invading lymphocytes. O'Hanlon et al. [52] detected a restricted TCR Vβ6 repertoire in anti-Jo-1 antibody-positive PM patients. To date only one PM patient has been observed whose muscle-infiltrating T lymphocytes were of the γ/δ TCR subset [32]; they had the unusual phenotype Vγ3-Jγ1-Cγ1/Vδ2-Jδ3-Cδ [57]. O'Hanlon et al. [54] screened a large series of IM patients for the γ/δ TCR repertoire and found γ/δ gene rearrangements in only 20% of cases; they found no similarities between clonotypes at the junctional regions of the γ/δ TCR, suggesting that γ/δ T lymphocytes are likely to be of secondary importance in the myocytotoxic process in IM.

In IBM the cellular infiltrate is similar to that observed in PM, and consists of endomysial CD8 + T lymphocytes and macrophages; these cells surround and may invade non-necrotic myofibres (Fig. 1D). Furthermore MHC class I molecules are up-regulated on muscle fibres (Fig. 1E) in IBM. These findings support the idea of MHC-restricted T-cell activation towards antigenic determinants on muscle cells in IBM [49]. Several groups of workers have investigated the TCR repertoire of muscle-infiltrating T cells in IBM: an oligoclonal TCR repertoire with heterogeneity in the CDR3 domain has been found [39,44,53], suggesting that in IBM T-cell recruitment in muscle tissue is stimulated by a superantigen or by superantigen-like activity. The muscle fibres in IBM are characterized by vacuoles (Fig. 1F) containing abnormal accumulations of β-amyloid protein (Fig. 1G,H) and ubiquitin [5]. It is interesting that ubiquitination of the TCR occurs after it has engaged Ag [14]. Moreover, IBM vacuoles stain positively for α1-antichymotrypsin, phosphorylated tau, prion protein and apolipoprotein E [5]. Whether these abnormal accumulations within myofibres are responsible for, or secondary to, muscle inflammation still needs to be explored. In this regard the finding of Pruitt et al. [58] is relevant: these workers showed that non-necrotic amyloid-negative muscle fibres are invaded by T cells more frequently than necrotic amyloid-positive fibres, indicating that immune-mediated mechanisms probably play a primary role in IBM.  Thus the immunopathogenetic mechanisms resulting in muscle cell damage are the same in PM and IBM. However, the molecular characteristics of the TCRs are different in the two diseases and this finding underlines the importance of molecular immunology for understanding the pathogenesis of these diseases.

In DM the cells infiltrating the muscle are mainly B lymphocytes, but T lymphocytes are also found; immunophenotypic analysis has shown a higher CD4/CD8 ratio perivascularly than endomysially or perimysially. Characteristically, CD4 + T cells lie in close proximity to B cells and macrophages [4]. The overall picture is of a humoral-mediated process with evidence of small numbers of lymphocytes invading non-necrotic muscle fibres and occlusion of intramuscular arterioles and capillaries by immunoglobulin and complement fractions [37]. Microangiopathy, leading to a net reduction of number of capillaries per muscle fibre, is an early sign and precedes the inflammatory reaction and muscle damage (Fig. 1I) [23]. Ischaemic involvement of larger intramuscular blood vessels produces perifascicular atrophy, a diagnostic feature of DM (Fig. 1J) [12].

A recent study on the immunocytochemical localization of the CD45 T-cell subset (CD45RA = virgin T cells and CD45RO = memory T cells) in IM has revealed that in all these diseases the CD45RO + memory T cells are increased in frequency and that the CD45RO/RA ratio in muscle exceeds that of peripheral blood. Since in PM and IBM the increased frequency of CD45RO + memory T cells is mostly in the endomysial compartment, this suggests that these cells are directly involved in the pathogenetic process. In DM the finding of CD45RO + memory T cells mainly perivascularly implies either an enhanced transendothelial migratory capacity of these cells or that RA to RO conversion occurred after cell diapedesis [22].

T-lymphocyte features (proliferation, phenotype differentiation and Th1 versus Th2 typing) depend on lymphokine production: interleukin (IL)-2, IL-4, IL-6, interferon (IFN)-γ, tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-α, etc. [56]. A certain level of IL-2 expression is necessary to prevent T cell anergy and, together with co-stimulatory signals, is necessary for promoting T-cell cytotoxicity [59]. Cytotoxicity is mainly a function of CD8 + T cells, but CD4 + T cells may also perform this activity [10]. Since in PM and IBM the major elements of cellular infiltrates are CD8 + T lymphocytes (even though CD4 + T cells are found), detection of muscle-specific T-cell-activating lymphokine mRNA is important for elucidating the immunobiological characteristics of these diseases. Recently, it has been shown that T-cell-derived transcripts of IL-4, IL-2 receptor (IL-2R), TNF-α, and IFN-γ can be amplified by reverse transcriptase PCR in muscles of patients with inflammatory myopathies [3,41]. Additionally, Tews and Goebel [63] have found enhanced expression of several pro-inflammatory and immunomodulatory cytokines (IL-1, IL-2, IL-4, TNF-α and β, and IFN-γ) in IM muscles by immunocytochemistry. However, the cytokine data should be carefully evaluated since their detection may depend either on pulse release from pathogenetic T cells [41] or on the patchy distribution of inflammation within muscle tissue [46]. The detection of IL-2R transcript is important in view of a report that serum expression of IL-1α, and IL-2 and soluble IL-2R is increased in PM [65]. Furthermore, higher concentrations of soluble IL-2R (sIL-2R) are associated with higher creatine kinase (CK), lactate dehydrogenase and aldolase levels in these patients [65]. Soluble CD4 (sCD4) and CD8 (sCD8) have been reported in PM and DM patients [64]: the concentrations were similar in both groups of patients, and only sCD8 levels were significantly higher than in controls.

Cell degeneration and necrosis are generally thought to be due to cytotoxic mechanisms mediated by lymphocytes or natural killer (NK) cells [26]; however, the functional mediators of cytotoxicity have not yet been unambiguously identified. Cytotoxicity is being intensively investigated and two major mechanisms have been suggested:

(1) membranolytic cytotoxicity, characterized by pore formation in target cell membranes; and (2) non-secretory cytotoxicity, characterized by induction of apoptosis in target cells (see [11] for a comprehensive review). The principal agents of pore formation are perforin and granzyme, both contained in the lytic granules of cytotoxic cells [40,61]. Perforin, a 75 kDa protein having extensive homology with fraction C9 of complement, is secreted by Ca 2+ -dependent exocytosis. It binds to target membrane and, after polymerization, forms pores 6-16 nm in diameter through which substances effecting cell degradation can diffuse. However, perforin's role in cytotoxicity has been controversial until very recently, when Kägi et al. [35] observed that specifically activated CD8 + T cells isolated from perforin-deficient mice were unable to lyse choriomeningitis virus-infected target cells, demonstrating the key role of perforin in T-cell-mediated cytotoxicity. Co-expression of perforin and granzyme transcripts has been detected in PM muscles by our group [3], and both proteins have been demonstrated immunocytochemically on muscle infiltrating cells in IM ( [55] and Fig. 1 K). Detection of both perforin and granzyme in PM and IBM muscles suggests that these enzymes cooperate in bringing about tissue damage, probably through sarcolemma pore formation and subsequent necrosis.

The role of apoptosis in muscle cell necrobiosis is still far from clear. Sandri et al. [60] have reported the presence of apoptotic myonuclei in muscles of normal and mdx mice; Yamada et al. [66] analysed the expression on muscle fibres of the apoptosis-related proteins Fas and BCL2 [34,29], by immunocytochemistry, and were able to identify only Fas on type II muscle fibres in both normal control and diseased muscles. However, Adler et al. found no evidence of apoptosis in muscles of patients affected by IM [1, 2].

Immunopathological features of target cells in idiopathic IM

As noted above, no antigens have so far been identified as the target of the cytotoxic autoimmune attack in IM. However, muscle tissue-specific features have been observed in the course of inflammation:

1. Increased expression of MHC class I has been demonstrated on the sarcolemma of muscle fibres (Fig. 1E) in association with cytotoxic T lymphocytes in PM and IBM, but no expression of MHC class II molecules [4, 25,26,47].

Increased expression of MHC class I on muscle cells

and MHC class II on endothelial cells of muscle blood vessels has been demonstrated in DM, in association with a predominance of B lymphocytes perivascularly [26].

It is important to stress that normal human skeletal muscle stains only weakly for MHC class I by immunocytochemistry (Fig. 1E) [17,36] while MHC class II is not expressed [18]. Hence overexpression seems to be disease specific in IM and related to immunopathogenesis in these conditions. Interestingly, increased expression of MHC class I has also been observed on atrophic and regenerating myofibres in IM and spinal muscle atrophy [24].

The ability to purify and culture muscle cells in vitro has made it possible to begin studying the immunobiology and immunological involvement of muscle cells in the pathogenesis of various muscle diseases, including IM and myasthenia gravis [33]. Cultured myoblasts and myotubes constitutively express MHC class I and lymphocyte function associated 3 molecule (LFA-3), but are able to increase expression or express de novo MHC class I, MHC class II (DR>DP>DQ) or intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) after stimulation with IFN-γ or IFN-γ plus TNF-α [8,27,28,30,42,45,48]. Increased expression of ICAM-1 has been found near the cellular infiltrate, mainly on endomysial capillaries and regenerating myofibres in IM [6,21,62]. It is noteworthy that on muscle cryosections regenerating fibres express detectable quantities of MHC class I and ICAM-1, and that MHC class I expression on cultured myoblasts disappears as they fuse to multinucleated myotubes, suggesting a role of MHC class I/MHC class II (possibly also ICAM-1) in myogenesis [8,45,48]. It is also important to note that IFN-γ-treated myoblasts can show Ag-presenting activity in experiments on in vitro autologous T-cell proliferation, as demonstrated by Goebels et al. [27]. However, we have clearly demonstrated that the ability of muscle cells to express MHC class II Ags following IFN-γ treatment is lost after innervation in vitro [45]. This may imply that only a subset of muscle cells, possibly the regenerating myoblasts, can participate in class II immune reactivity.

Table 1 summarizes the immunobiological features of effector and target cells in inflammatory myopathies.

Clinical and diagnostic features of idiopathic IM

DM is more common in childhood but also occurs in adults. No specific clinical or biological feature accounts for the difference between the childhood and adult forms. The incidence is about 0.6/100,000 and prevalence about 6.3/100,000. The female to male ratio is about 3 :1. The diagnostic clinical features include a combination of skin and muscle symptoms. Characteristic skin manifestations include rash, which accompanies or more often precedes muscle symptoms; there may be heliotrope rash (bluepurple discoloration on eyelids with oedema), a flat red rash on the face and upper trunk, and erythema of the knuckles with a raised violaceous scaly eruption (Gottron rash); erythematous signs may also occur on other parts of the body. Additional signs are dilated capillary loops at the base of the finger nails, and rough, cracked fingers with dirty irregular lines. Muscle symptoms more frequently affect proximal muscles, whereas distal muscles are typically compromised only later in the disease. The extraocular muscles are usually unaffected even in advanced cases when the facial muscles can be involved; pharyngeal and neck flexors are often involved, and in more serious untreated cases the respiratory muscles may be compromised. Muscle weakness is usually associated with muscle wasting. Myalgia and muscle tenderness frequently occur during eruptive phases accompanied by prominent cutaneous manifestations.

A common feature of childhood DM is subcutaneous calcification, which can be extensive; subcutaneous calcification sometimes occur in adults [19,26].

The clinical picture of PM is less distinctive than that of DM [26]. PM should be suspected in cases presenting as a subacute proximal myopathy without evidence of inherited transmission. Incidence and prevalence are reported to be similar to those of DM but PM is extremely rare in childhood. Studies have shown that HLA are only weakly linked with disease incidence related to ethnic differences, patients' age and serological positivity (Jo-1, Mi-2, PM-Scl antibodies). The female to male ratio is 3 :1. The clinical course of PM is usually subacute. In the typical affected adult there are no cutaneous symptoms, or involvement of ocular or facial muscles, and the history is negative for hereditary muscular disease and exposure to myotoxic drugs or toxins. Disease onset can be difficult to ascertain because subclinical disease may persist for months before the patient sees a physician. The severity and distribution of muscle weakness and wasting are similar to DM, while myalgia and muscle tenderness are less frequent than in DM.

The clinical features of IBM are distinct from those of PM and DM [49]. IBM is typically a chronic progressive muscle disorder with onset usually after the age of 50 years. Onset is insidious and disease course slow, so that the incidence of the disease is difficult to establish. The condition is more frequent in males than in females (ratio 3 :1) and in whites than in blacks. Muscle weakness and atrophy more frequently affect distal muscles. Foot extensor deficit may be present in more than 50% of cases and is a clue to early diagnosis. Selective involvement of triceps, biceps, iliopsoas and quadriceps is frequently evident and responsible for sudden falls. In rare cases, IBM may progress quickly to respiratory muscle failure necessitating intubation [16]. Noticeably asymmetric involvement of muscles is typical. Tendon reflexes are usually lost and because of distal atrophy and weakness a neurogenic disease may be diagnosed by mistake. Unrespon-siveness to immunosuppressive therapy in suspected PM directs suspicion towards IBM.

Although IBM is considered to be an acquired condition (sporadic or s-IBM), familial cases have been described (hereditary or h-IBM); these present very little muscle inflammation, although other pathological changes are similar to those observed in s-IBM [5]. Modes of transmission have not yet been unambiguously established, and several candidate mutations have been proposed [5].

Extramuscular manifestations of IM

Extramuscular manifestations in IM may include fever, malaise, weight loss, arthralgia and Raynaud′s phenomenon. Cardiac abnormalities are common, with atrioventricular defects, tachyarrythmias, low ejection fraction or dilated cardiomyopathy being detected in up to 40% of PM and DM patients, but less frequently in IBM. Lung disease may precede other symptoms or occur early in the disease in up to 10% of PM and DM patients, half of whom will prove positive for anti-Jo-1 antibodies. Malignancies are more frequent in IM patients than in the general population, and frequencies differ between DM and PM (see below).

Laboratory findings and diagnosis of IM

Elevated muscle enzymes in blood, myopathic electromyography (EMG) and inflammation on muscle biopsy specimens are the most striking features [19]. Creatine kinase (CK) in PM and DM is usually several tenfold above normal, but cases with normal plasma CK are not exceptional. In IBM, CK levels are inconstantly elevated and are frequently in the normal range. Myoglobinuria may be present when rhabdomyolysis is a prominent feature.

EMG shows myopathic potentials and increased spontaneous activity with fibrillation and positive sharp waves. The EMG pattern in IBM is usually similar to that observed in PM/DM, but frequently both a myopathic and a neurogenic pattern may be detected, with EMG signs of axonal neuropathy evident in up to 30% of IBM patients.

Muscle biopsy specimens show aspecific inflammatory and degenerative aspects in all IM plus specific features for DM, PM and IBM which allow reliable distinction between them. In PM, endomysial inflammatory cells and a specific degenerative picture are the most characteristic findings in muscle tissue (Fig. 1A). Degeneration is evidenced by the presence of patchily distributed necrotic myofibres, either isolated or in clusters, which are frequently invaded by macrophages and lymphocytes; myofibre regeneration is often observed in asssociation with necrosis. Fibre diameter variation and connective tissue proliferation are observed and become more conspicuous with longer duration of the disease. Scattered non-necrotic fibres may be surrounded and invaded by lymphocytes and macrophages. Cell infiltrates (Fig. 1B,C), common around blood vessels and extending into the perimysium, endomysium and fascicles, are composed of T and B lymphocytes, NK cells and macrophages; their phenotype, distribution and frequency were discussed above.

The pathological picture of DM differs markedly from that observed in PM. Specifically muscle biopsy characteristically reveals perifascicular atrophy (PA) and microvascular changes [26] (Fig. 1I,J). In PA, fibres at various stages of degeneration are found at the border of the muscle fascicles in close relationship with the main perimysial septa. PA is diagnostic of DM even in the absence of inflammation and is more frequently found in paediatric than adult DM; it is absent in PM and IBM. The microvascular changes comprise hyperplasia of blood vessel walls with immunoreactivity for complement membrane attack complex, and decreased capillary membrane density. These data indicate that the capillaries are an early target of the disease process in DM.

In IBM muscle biopsy reveals lymphocytic infiltrates, mainly CD8 + cells, and macrophages; HLA class I increased immunoreactivity may also be observed (Fig. 1E) [49]. There is no evidence of perifascicular atrophy, but the characteristic muscle biopsy finding in IBM is myofibres containing vacuoles with basophilic granules and eosinophilic inclusions (Fig. 1F), plus the presence of angular fibres, often in small groups. The vacuoles have been shown to contain a variety of abnormal accumulations: ubiquitin, β-amyloid etc. (Fig. 1G,H) [5]. Electron microscopy shows that the granules contain membranous whorls, while abnormal tubular filaments are present in the cytoplasm or nuclei. Immuno-electron microscopy has shown that ubiquitin localizes to cytoplasmic tubulofilaments, and β-amyloid localizes to amorphous areas of vacuoles as well as to amyloid-like fibrils.

IM associated with systemic disorders

IM and malignancies

There is an established association between inflammatory myopathies and malignancy, although the incidence of the latter varies according to type of myopathy (for a comprehensive review, see [13]). In DM the link is well established, with a reported frequency between 6% and 45%; in PM the link is less clear, with a reported frequency ranging from 0 to 28%. The tumour diagnosis may precede or follow the onset of IM; however there is usually a clear time relationship between the two. Removal of the tumour usually brings about a significant improvement in muscle weakness, and reappearance of muscle weakness or increased muscle enzyme levels during follow-up often coincides with tumour regrowth. A wide variety of tumours are associated with IM, but the most common are ovarian (13.3% vs. 1% in the general population) and stomach cancers [13]; among Asian IM patients a frequent association with nasopharyngeal carcinoma is reported [38]. It is important to note that the type and site of the malignancy are age dependent. A complete annual examination for tumour should be performed in IM patients, with particular attention given to the pelvic region, rectum, urinary tract, chest and breast, as well as to haematology findings.

The response to steroid therapy varies greatly from patient to patient and conclusions on steroid efficacy differ from one series to the next [26]. Furthermore, the utility of steroids is difficult to assess because the malignancy often causes weakness on its own account.

Cancer patients often express complement-fixing autoantibodies which react to their tumour but not to other tumours or cell lines. This finding suggests either that autoantibodies to tumour Ag cross-react with muscle antigens in a proportion of patients, or that tumours release 

Overlap syndromes

Overlap syndromes are diagnosed when the criteria for both diseases are fullfilled (Table 2).

Scleroderma-myositis

The incidence of myositis is reported at between 5% and 17% of scleroderma cases. These patients usually have mild weakness with mild or absent increase in serum CK. EMG shows little or no spontaneous activity. Muscle biopsy reveals pathological alterations very similar to those observed in PM/DM: usually perimysial fibrosis and inflammation, atrophy of type 2 muscle fibres, and vasculopathy typical of scleroderma. Patients with scleroderma-myositis may have either of the two forms of scleroderma: progressive systemic sclerosis (PSS) or CREST syndrome (calcinosis, Raynaud's phenomenon, oesophageal disease, sclerodactyly and cutaneous telangiectasia). These conditions usually respond well to immunosuppressive therapy. Anti-PM-scleroderma (PM-Scl or PM-1) antibodies are a specific marker for scleroderma-myositis, but are also found in other diseases such as pure myositis and rheumatoid arthritis.

Sjögren's syndrome-myositis

The major manifestations of Sjögren's syndrome (SS), once known as sicca syndrome, are dryness of the eyes, mouth and mucous membranes, plus chronic arthritis. In severe forms lack of secretion may involve the entire respiratory tract, gastrointestinal tract, vagina and skin. Muscle involvement is very frequent: weakness is usually severe, affecting proximal muscles symmetrically. Dysphagia and nasal speech may be present. Pathological changes found on muscle biopsy specimens from SS patients are usually those of myositis sometimes associated with vasculitis (Fig. 1L). SS is frequently associated not only with PM and DM but also scleroderma, SLE, polyarteritis, chronic active hepatitis, primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), and lymphoproliferative neoplasia. High levels of IgG and IgM may be found, while anti γ-globulin and antinuclear antibodies -specific for the ribonucleoprotein (RNP) antigens SS-A (Ro) and SS-B (La) -are present in up to 90% of patients.

SLE-myositis

The two primary manifestations of SLE are skin rash and arthritis. Either PM and DM can occur in the course of Retrovirus-related myopathies (Table 3) Awareness of the muscular manifestations of retroviral infections, particularly of HIV infection, is important for several reasons: the myopathy may be concomitant with seroconversion to HIV or may be the only sign of concomitant chronic HIV infection; also myopathy and neuropathy may be associated with other systemic or neurological disturbances in HIV patients, markedly increasing disability.

HIV myopathy

Patients with HIV may develop an IM which is strikingly similar to PM, when muscle biopsy may reveal an inflammatory reaction localized perivascularly, perimysially and endomysially. The inflammatory cells include lymphocytes and macrophages which surround and invade myofibres; necrobiosis, phagocytosis and myofibre degenera-tion are also evident. In other cases pathological muscle alterations may be characterized by muscle fibre necrosis with little inflammation and rarely nemaline (rod) bodies.

HIV myopathy can develop early in the infection, but occurs more frequently in the later stages of disease. Symptoms comprise subacute onset of symmetrical muscle weakness associated (or not) with muscle wasting. Myalgia may be prominent. CK levels are usually elevated. EMG shows spontaneous activity with fibrillation potentials and myopathic motor unit potentials.

HTLV-1 myopathy

The human T-cell lymphotropic virus (HTLV-1) has been associated with T-cell leukaemia, tropical spastic paraparesis (TSP) and polymyositis. Up to 85% of Jamaicans with PM are seropositive for HTLV-1. In HTLV-1-positive patients, PM can occur alone or together with TSP. The onset symptoms are progressive muscle weakness and elevated CK levels. The histopathological findings comprise perimysial and endomysial inflammation with muscle fibre necrosis. The cells participating in inflammation are similar to those observed in PM associated with HIV.

AZT myopathy

Following the extensive use of AZT as a treatment for HIV, beginning in 1986, increased numbers of HIV my-opathies were observed. It is now evident that AZT-related myopathy is a reality, the symptoms of which (generally proximal muscle weakness and myalgia) are related to the dosage and duration of treatment. Symptoms develop after about 12 months on the drug and improve gradually when treatment is stopped: myalg more rapidly and muscle weakness more slowly. Serum CK is usually elevated and worsened by muscle exercise. A substantial decrease in the frequency of AZT myopathy can be obtained by reducing the daily dosage from 1200 mg to 600 mg. However, even these lower dosages may induce AZT myopathy after a long period of treatment. The EMG findings are similar to those reported for HIV myopathy. Muscle changes include characteristic inflammatory findings (similar to but less severe than those observed in HIV myopathy) and the presence of numerous ragged red fibres, indicative of a disturbance of mitochondrial activity. Histoenzymatic staining for lipids (oil red O) shows accumulations of lipid droplets within myofibres and electron microscopy of AZT-treated muscles reveals ubiquitous mitochondrial abnormalities. Molecular and immunocytochemistry studies reveal reduced mitochondrial DNA in muscle cells possibly due to AZT-induced inhibition of the mitochondrial γ-DNA polymerase [67]. 

Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to Carlo Antozzi, MD for criticisms and suggestions on the manuscript and to Donald Ward for help with the English.

Fig.Fig. 1 A Muscle biopsy specimens from a patient with polymyositis (PM) showing mononuclear cells at the perimysium and endomysium, necrobiosis, variation in myofibre diameter and increased perimysial and endomysial connective tissue. H & E, × 250. B PM: a non-necrotic muscle fibre is surrounded and invaded by mononuclear cells. H & E, × 400. C Cytotoxic T lymphocytes, strongly positive for CD8 staining (red fuorescence), invade the muscle fibres in PM; muscle fibre plasmalemma is stained by antidystrophin antibody (green fluorescence). Immunofluorescence technique, × 400. D Inclusion body myositis (IBM): a mononuclear cell infiltrate surrounds a non-necrotic muscle fibre; rimmed vacuoles can be observed. H & E, × 400. E Increased expression of MHC class I molecules on imflammatory myopathy (IM) muscle fibres (E1) is detected by peroxidase staining; E2 normal muscle negative for the MHC class I staining. Immunoperoxidase staining, × 250. F Cryostat section of IBM muscle showing typical vacuoles with basophilic red granular material in the muscle cell cytoplasm. Modified Gomori trichrome stain, × 400. G Localization of amyloid protein within IBM muscle fibres: vacuoles are positively stained by thioflavine A. Fluorescence microscopy on histochemical preparation, × 320. H IBM muscle fibre showing vacuole: the amyloid deposits are Congo red positive (upper) and display apple-green birefringence in polarized light (lower) . Histochemical technique, × 400. I Dermatomyositis (DM) muscle: capillaries stained with fluorescent Ulex europaeus agglutinin lectin: I1 capillary network of a control muscle; I2 marked reduction in the number of capillaries, which are also dilated. Immunofluorescence technique, × 250. J In a DM muscle section perifascicular atrophy is shown at low magnification: atrophic, small fibres in the periphery of the muscle fascicles are evident as more intensely NADHstained fibres. Histoenzymatic technique, × 180. K PM muscle: endomysial T lymphocytes are positive for perforin. Immunofluorescence technique, × 400. L Myositis associated with Sjögren disease: H & E staining shows infiltration of vessels and surrounding tissue, × 250

Table 11Immunobiological features of effector and muscle cells in inflammatory myopathies (+++, ++, +, -= strong, medium, weak signal; DM dermatomyositis, IBM inclusion body myositis,PM polymyositis)PMIBMDMț Effector cellsT lymphocytes:endomysial++++++perimysial+++++perivascular+++/++B lymphocytes:endomysial+/-+/-+perimysial++++perivascular++/-+++Macrophages+/+++/+++NK cells+++/-T Cell Receptor:α/β heterodimer γ/δ heterodimer α/β repertoire aPresent Rare Oligoclonal Oligoclonal Polyclonal Present Present Rare RareCDR3Non random RandomRandomCytokine transcripts:IL-2/IL-2R+-+IFN-γ+++/-TNF-α++++/-IL-4+++/--Cytotoxic enzymes:PerforinPresentPresentAbsentGranzymePresentPresentAbsentț Muscle cellsMHC class I++++++++MHC class II+++++ICAM-1++++++-VCAM-1---LFA-1---LFA-3++-a Oligoclonal or polyclonal TCR repertoire expressed as number of Vα or Vβ rearrangements detected

Table 22Overlap syndromes (CK creatine kinase, MCTD mixed connective tissue disease, PBC primary biliary cirrhosis, PSS progressive systemic sclerosis, SLE systemic lupus erythematosus, SS Sjögren's syndrome)MusclePlasmaEMGMuscleAntibodiesAssociation withsymptomsCKbiopsyother diseases1. Scleroderma-myositisLow-gradeMild/absentLittle/noPM or DMPM-1PSS/CRESTweaknessspontaneoussimilaractivity2. Sjögren's syndrome-SevereMild to elevatedMild,PM or DMSS-APSS, PBC, SLEmyositisweaknessmyopathicsimilarSS-Bchronic activehepatitis3. SLE-myositisLow-gradeMild/absentMostlyUsuallyDNAVarious aweakness,normalnormalSm (RNP)myalgia4. MCTD-myositisLow-gradeAbsentMild,DM similarU 1 sn RNPSLE, PSSweaknessmyopathica See text for a complete list of other associated autoimmune diseases

Table 33Retrovirus-related myopathies (AZT zidovudine)SymptomsPlasma CKEMGMuscle biopsy findings1. Myopathy associatedWeakness, myalgiaElevatedMyogenic,Similar to PM, inflammation,with HIVspontaneousnecrosis with minimal inflam-activitymation, rarely rod bodies2. Myopathy associatedWeaknessElevatedMyogenic,Peri, endomysial inflammation,with HTLV-1spontaneousmyofibre necrosis, phagocytosisactivity3. Myopathy associatedWeakness, onset afterElevatedMyogenicSimilar to HIV myopathy, numer-with AZT therapy12 months therapy a ,ous rods, cytoplasmic bodies,improvement afterand ragged red fibres, reducedAZT discontinuationmitochondrial DNAa Reduction of AZT from 1200 mg to 600 mg per day induces a reduction in AZT myopathy

