␤APP gene transfer into cultured human muscle induces inclusion-body myositis aspects

Direct transfer of the ␤-amyloid precursor protein (␤APP) gene into cultured normal human muscle, using recombinant adenovirus vector, was sufficient to induce several of the typical light microscopic, electron microscopic (EM), and EM-immunochemical aspects of the inclusion-body myositis (IBM) phenotype, including congophilia, clusters of amyloid-␤-positive 6-10 nm filaments, and 15-21 nm tubulofilamentous inclusions in the nuclei. Our results suggest that excessive production of intracellular ␤APP may play an important role in the pathogenic cascade leading to the IBM phenotype.

Introduction

Inclusion-body myositis (IBM) is the most common progressive muscle disease of persons over age 50, and no successful treatment is available. Its cause and pathogenesis are unknown (reviewed in Refs 1, 2). Muscle biopsies of IBM patients show vacuolated muscle fibers, atrophic muscle fibers and various degrees of lymphocytic inflammation. 1,2 Within IBM vacuolated muscle fibers, there is a unique combination of features (reviewed in Refs 1, 2), including pathological accumulations of the following: ␤APP, including ␤-amyloid protein (A␤); 3 751-␤APP mRNA; 4 several other proteins that are also accumulated in Alzheimer brain; 1,2 and congophilic amyloid. 5 Electron microscopy (EM) reveals characteristic features of IBM muscle fibers, including cytoplasmic clusters of 6-10 nm filaments containing A␤, 3 cytoplasmic 15-21 nm paired helical filaments (PHFs) containing hyperphosphorylatedtau, 1 15-21 nm tubulofilamentous inclusions (which are actually PHFs and are evident in favorable sections) in 3-4% of the nuclei, and abnormal mitochondria. 1,2 Abnormal accumulation of ␤APP epitopes, including A␤, might play a major role in the pathogenesis of IBM, since that often precedes other abnormalities, including congophilia and vacuolization. 1,2 A major pathogenic role for A␤ has been also proposed in Alzheimer disease (see Refs 6, 7). However, the actual consequences of ␤APP overexpression and the sequence of events in the pathogenic cascade are not understood in either disease. Because over-expression of both the ␤APP gene and ␤APP protein has been demonstrated in biopsied muscle fibers of IBM, 3,4 we asked whether overproduction of ␤APP in previously normal muscle is sufficient to cause some of the typical morphological aspects of the IBM phenotype, including the intracellular congophilia. We therefore transferred cDNA encoding 751-␤APP into well differentiated cultured normal adult human muscle fibers utilizing an adenovirus vector. Our initial observations were that ␤APP gene transfer into cultured normal human muscle causes deficiency of cytochrome-c oxidase and structural mitochondrial abnormalities. 8

Materials and Methods

Two recombinant replication-deficient adenoviruses containing the ␤APP gene in sense and antisense orientation were constructed as described. 8 In brief, pACCMVpLpA was prepared by modifying the pAC vector, 9,10 accomplished by replacing a region of the adenovirus genome between map units 1.3 and 9.1 with the cytomegalovirus (CMV) early promoter. A cloning cassette was also inserted immediately downstream from the CMV promoter, followed by a fragment of the simian virus 40 genome that included the small t-antigen intron and the polyadenylation signal. A 3 kb human ␤APP cDNA encoding ␤APP-751 containing the KPI insert 11 was inserted into pACCMVpLpA.

Clinical Neuroscience and Neuropathology

Two recombinant viruses were then obtained by co-transfection of 293 cells (AdE1A-transformed human embryonic kidney cells) with appropriate pACCMVpLpA plasmids and pJM17 plasmid. 12 The PJM17 plasmid encodes a full-length adenovirus-5 genome interrupted by the insertion of the bacterial plasmid pBRX at position 3.7 map units, allowing one to exceed the packaging limit for adenovirus. 12 Homologous recombination in 293 cells between the pJM17 plasmid and the recombinant pACCMVpLpA-␤APP and pACCMV-␣␤APP (␤APP cDNA in antisense orientation) generated two replication-deficient viruses, which were carrying ␤APP cDNA in sense and antisense orientation. The presence of these DNAs was confirmed by Southern blotting. Viruses were amplified by growth in 293 cells. The appropriate viral plaques were expanded and purified and were stored at -20°C.

Purified human muscle cultures were established, according to our previously reported technique (reviewed in Ref. 13), from satellite cells of portions of diagnostic muscle biopsies (obtained with informed consent) from 20 patients who were considered free of muscle disease after all tests were performed. In our system, aneurally cultured human muscle achieves advanced maturation and can be maintained for 2 months or longer. 13 Muscle fibers cultured for 2 weeks (i.e. 5-7 days after myoblast fusion) were infected with ␤APPadenovirus at doses ranging from 1.5 ϫ 10 8 to 0.3 ϫ 10 8 p.f.u./ml of culture medium. Concurrent controls were uninfected sister cultures and sister cultures infected with adenovirus carrying antisense ␤APP-cDNA, adenovirus carrying the ␤-galactosidase gene, and replication-deficient recombinant 'wild' adenovirus vector composed of the same plasmids as the ␤APP-adenovirus but not carrying any foreign cDNA other than the CMV promoter gene and the SV40 polyadenylation signal ('empty' adenovirus). 8 Uninfected sister cultures were also treated with conditioned medium from cultures infected with ␤APP-adenovirus. Previously we showed by Northern blots, immunoblots, in situ hybridization, and immunocytochemistry that adenovirus-mediated ␤APP-gene transfer into cultured normal human muscle results in strong over-expression of the ␤APP gene and protein, which typically lasts several weeks. 8 Three to five weeks after ␤APP gene transfer, ␤APP-over-expressing and control cultures were processed for EM as described previously. 14 Fluorescence immunocytochemistry and EM gold immunolocalization of A␤ were performed according to our methods, 3 using rabbit polyclonal antiserum 1280 against A␤, 15 diluted 1:200. Congo-red staining was visualized by our fluorescence-enhanced method, 16 3-7 weeks following ␤APP gene-transfer.

Results

There was a dose-dependent cytopathic effect of the transferred ␤APP gene. Doses of 1.5 ϫ 10 8 and 1 ϫ 10 8 p.f.u./ml of ␤APP-adenovirus caused pronounced vacuolization of muscle fibers and their degeneration within 3-5 days and 8-12 days, respectively, after infection. Smaller doses of 0.5 or 0.3 ϫ 10 8 p.f.u./ml, also produced vacuolation and degeneration of most of the muscle fibers (Fig. 1A), but not until 3-5 weeks after ␤APP gene transfer. The dose of 0.3 ϫ 10 8 was utilized in the present study.

The resultant ␤APP-over-expressing cultured muscle fibers, like those in IBM biopsied-muscle, manifested A␤ immunoreactivity in small clusters (Fig. 1C). The sister cultured muscle fibers in all of the control groups appeared healthy, cross-striated, and without vacuoles (Fig. 1B) or A␤ immunoreactivity (Fig. 1D). In ␤APP-over-expressing cultured muscle fibers, EM-immunochemistry localized the A␤ in 6-10 nm diameter filaments and small amorphous foci (Fig. 1E), as in IBM biopsied muscle. 3 Five to six weeks after ␤APP gene transfer, 5-8% of the very abnormal muscle fibers of ␤APP-overexpressing cultures contained small congophilic inclusions (Fig. 1F) similar to some of the congophilic inclusions in IBM biopsied muscle fibers (Fig. 1G). Three weeks after ␤APP gene transfer, cultured muscle fibers showed EM abnormalities identical to those present in biopsied IBM fibers, including clusters of 6-10 nm diameter filaments in about 60% of the cultured fibers (Fig. 1H; cf. 1I); myelin-like whorls within the vacuoles (Fig. 1J; cf 1K); nuclear 15-21 nm diameter tubulofilamentous inclusions in 6-8% of the cultured muscle fiber nuclei (Fig. 1L; cf. 1M,N; cf. 1O); and dense cytoplasmic bodies in 25% of the cultured fibers (not shown). The magnitude of the abnormalities correlated with the duration of ␤APP-gene over-expression. These changes were not caused by the adenovirus per se since there were no morphological abnormalities like those evident with the sense-␤APP gene in control cultures infected with 'empty' adenovirus vector or with adenovirus carrying either the ␤APP gene in antisense orientation or the ␤-galactosidase gene.

The cytoplasmic 15-21 nm paired helical filaments (PHFs) typical of IBM have not yet been observed in the ␤APP-over-expressing cultured muscle. These V. Askanas et al.  (A,B) Phase-contrast microscopy of 5-week-old cultured muscle 3 weeks after ␤APP gene transfer (A), and control sister-cultured muscle infected with replication-deficient 'wild' adenovirus vector for 3 weeks (B). There is pronounced vacuolization in a ␤APP-over-expressing muscle fiber (A), while the same-age control muscle fibers are healthy and cross-striated (both ϫ2400). (C,D) Immunofluorescence with antiserum 1280 against A␤. In the ␤APP-over-expressing cultured muscle fibers, there is strikingly increased A␤ immunoreactivity in the form of multiple small clusters (C), whereas the non-infected control (D) is negative (both ϫ600). (E) Gold immunoelectronmicroscopy of ␤APP-over-expressing cultured muscle, showing A␤ localization to amorphous material and loosely arranged 6-10 nm filaments (ϫ53 000). Congo-red positive inclusions visualized by epifluorescence using the Texas-red filter system present in ␤APP-over-expressing cultured muscle (F) are similar to those in biopsied IBM muscle (G; both ϫ1960). (H-O) Electron microscopy. In a ␤APP-over-expressing muscle fiber, there are tight clusters of 6-10 nm diameter filaments (H, ϫ55 000), identical to those of a biopsied IBM muscle fiber (I, ϫ55 000); myelin-like whorls (J, ϫ5250), identical to those of a biopsied IBM muscle fiber (K, ϫ5280); and 15-21 nm diameter tubulofilamentous inclusions in muscle fiber nuclei (L,N) (L ϫ33 210; M ϫ39s000), identical to those in the nuclei of biopsied IBM muscle (M,O) (N, ϫ53 000; O ϫ53 400). Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/neuroreport by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hC

Discussion and Conclusion

IBM is probably a multifactorial disease, the direct cause of which is not known. The etiologic factor might be related to a virus, and/or a dysimmune mechanism, or possibly another cause, but none has been proven. 1,2 Aging factors may be an important component. The chain of events leading to the specific vacuolar muscle degeneration, including pathologic accumulation of characteristic proteins, cytoskeletal disorganization, and muscle fiber atrophy, is not known. Increased ␤APP-mRNA and increased accumulation of ␤APP epitopes appear to precede other abnormalities in IBM muscle fibers. 1,2 This study provides the evidence that over-production of ␤APP within cultured human muscle fibers is sufficient to induce several aspects of the IBM muscle phenotype. It suggests that upstream overexpressed ␤APP might be an important step in the pathogenic cascade of IBM. We do not yet know whether the observed abnormalities are caused by the whole ␤APP molecule, or by intracellularly increased A␤ or another ␤APP fragment.

Our most recent studies (in progress) show that the ␤APP-over-expressing cultures secrete into the medium much larger amounts of A␤ 1-40 than do controls, and they also secrete a substantial, but lesser, amount of A␤ 1-42 (while in control cultures A␤ 1-42 secretion is below the level of detection) (Xie, McFerrin, Engel, Selkoe and Askanas, preliminary studies, 1997). From this, one can infer that in our ␤APP-over-expressing cultured muscle fibers there is a prominently increased intracellular production of A␤ 1-40 and A␤ 1-42 , providing more precursor for aggregation into the observed A␤-containing 6-10 nm intracellular amyloid fibrils, particularly the A␤ 1-42 , which is considered more fibrillogenic. 7 Even though the conditioned medium did not induce abnormality in cultured normal-control human muscle we do not know whether there is a co-pathogenic role of the excessively secreted A␤ 1-40 and 1-42 acting extracellularly on the cultured muscle fibers that are themselves abnormal by virtue of their over-expressing ␤APP.

Our model enables long-term culturing of adult human skeletal muscle, the tissue affected by the IBM disease process, making possible sequential studies of changes consequent to the overexpression of ␤APP; analysis of the proposed role of ␤APP-induced oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of IBM; 17 and manipulations designed to augment detrimental effects of excess ␤APP or to 'therapeutically' mitigate them.  General Summary ␤-Amyloid precursor protein (␤APP) and its derivative ␤-amyloid protein (A␤) are considered key factors in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. A␤ is a major component of amyloid fibrils in extracellular senile plaques of Alzheimer disease (AD) brain. Whereas previously the pathologic accumulation of A␤ was considered confined to the brain of AD patients, it has recently been demonstrated that in a muscle disease, inclusion body myositis (IBM), common in persons over age 50, there are within the vacuolated muscle fibers abnormal accumulations of A␤, two other ␤APP epitopes, and ␤APP mRNA. Those muscle fibers also express several other 'Alzheimer-characteristic' proteins and congophilic material. Our current study provides the first evidence that direct transfer of a ␤APP gene into cultured normal human muscle, using recombinant adenovirus vector, is sufficient to induce several of the typical light-microscopic, electron microscopic and EM-immunochemical aspects of IBM, including congophilia, clusters of A␤-positive 6-10 nm diameter filaments, and nuclear inclusions of 15-21 nm diameter tubulofilaments. Because both IBM and AD occur in aging tissues, muscle and brain respectively, similar abnormal cellular mechanisms may be responsible for susceptibility to the yet-unknown early etiopathogenic events and downstream consequences of ␤APP over-expression in the pathologic cascade. This new culture model will be useful to study, in the type of tissue affected by the IBM disease process, namely adult human muscle fibers, various factors that might either augment detrimental effects of excessive ␤APP, or therapeutically mitigate them. Discovered beneficial factors might them be applied to the IBM patients. Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/neuroreport by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hC ywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdtwnfKZBYtws= on 03/07/2023

1 p 8 FIG. 1 .181FIG.1. Effects of ␤APP gene transfer on cultured normal human muscle fibers. (A,B) Phase-contrast microscopy of 5-week-old cultured muscle 3 weeks after ␤APP gene transfer (A), and control sister-cultured muscle infected with replication-deficient 'wild' adenovirus vector for 3 weeks (B). There is pronounced vacuolization in a ␤APP-over-expressing muscle fiber (A), while the same-age control muscle fibers are healthy and cross-striated (both ϫ2400). (C,D) Immunofluorescence with antiserum 1280 against A␤. In the ␤APP-over-expressing cultured muscle fibers, there is strikingly increased A␤ immunoreactivity in the form of multiple small clusters (C), whereas the non-infected control (D) is negative (both ϫ600). (E) Gold immunoelectronmicroscopy of ␤APP-over-expressing cultured muscle, showing A␤ localization to amorphous material and loosely arranged 6-10 nm filaments (ϫ53 000). Congo-red positive inclusions visualized by epifluorescence using the Texas-red filter system present in ␤APP-over-expressing cultured muscle (F) are similar to those in biopsied IBM muscle (G; both ϫ1960). (H-O) Electron microscopy. In a ␤APP-over-expressing muscle fiber, there are tight clusters of 6-10 nm diameter filaments (H, ϫ55 000), identical to those of a biopsied IBM muscle fiber (I, ϫ55 000); myelin-like whorls (J, ϫ5250), identical to those of a biopsied IBM muscle fiber (K, ϫ5280); and 15-21 nm diameter tubulofilamentous inclusions in muscle fiber nuclei (L,N) (L ϫ33 210; M ϫ39s000), identical to those in the nuclei of biopsied IBM muscle (M,O) (N, ϫ53 000; O ϫ53 400).

Received 77March 1997; accepted 27 April 1997 V. Askanas et al.

2158Vol 8 No 9-10 7 July 1997

