Ubiquitin Immunostaining and Inclusion Body Myositis: Study of 30 Patients With Inclusion Body Myositis

Distinction of inclusion body myositis (IBM) from other forms of inflammatory myopathy is significant from prognostic and therapeutic standpoints. This study retrospectively examines ubiquitin expression by paraffin immunohistochemistry in muscle biopsy material from 30 patients with IBM. Patients included 19 men and 11 women (ages 29 to 80 years; mean, 64 years). All biopsies were characterized by endomysial chronic inflammation, muscle fiber degeneration and regeneration, rimmed vacuoles, and angular atrophic esterase-positive muscle fibers. Ragged red fibers were identified in biopsies of five patients and a partial cytochrome C-oxidase deficiency by enzyme histochemistry in biopsies of 10 patients. Evidence of intranuclear or cytoplasmic tubulofilamentous structures confirming a diagnosis of IBM was observed in all 30 cases. Paracrystalfine mitochondrial inclusions were noted in five patients. Discrete myocyte intranuclear ubiqultin-positive inclusions were noted in 14 patients (47%). Discrete intracytoplasmic ubiquitin-positive inclusions were noted in 24 (80%) patients. Positive staining of rimmed vacuoles by ubiquitin was observed in 25 (83%) patients. Diffuse staining of scattered muscle fibers was observed in 21 (70%) patients. In a control group including

Since its initial description in the late 1960s, 1 inclusion body myositis has become well recognized as a distinct pathological entity, which needs to be distinguished from other forms of inflammatory myopathy, such as polymyositis, dermatomyositis, and infectious causes of myositis. Distinction of inclusion body myositis from other forms of inflammatory myopathy is particularly important from a therapeutic standpoint because most cases of inclusion body myositis have been refractory to steroid therapy. From a histological standpoint, light microscopic findings suggestive of inclusion body myositis include the presence of endomysial chronic inflammation accompanied by degenerating and regenerating muscle fibers. Somewhat more distinctive of inclusion body myositis are the presence of rimmed vacuoles within myocytes and the presence of an accompanying mild grouped atrophy. Ultrastructurally, identification of tubulofilamentous structures within the myocyte nuclus or cytoplasm, ranging in diameter from 12 to 18 nm, in the setting of an inflammatory myopathy is considered diagnostic of the condition. Optimal triage of a muscle biopsy for the evaluation of an inflammatory myopathy includes frozen tissue for enzyme histochemistry as well as tissue processed for electron microscopy.

Although the histopathology has been well described, the origin of inclusion body myositis remains elusive. A variety of theories has been advanced, but, as of yet, definitive proof supporting one theory versus another has not been forthcoming. One area of research has focused on the presence of ~-amyloid and other proteins in inclusion body myositis. Recognition of/%amyloid in inclusion body myositis has also been

a relanvely recent development." Recent research has found evidence of other proteins typically associated with Alzheimer's disease including phosphorylated 7protein, apolipoprotein E, a-antichymotrypsin, and ubiquitin, v-14 Of particular interest in this study is the potential role for ubiquitin in the diagnosis of inclusion body myositis and its distinction from other forms of inflammatory myopathy. The authors retrospectively reviewed muscle biopsies from 30 patients with ultrastrucrurally confirmed diagnoses of inclusion body myositis. The authors specifically examined ubiquitin expression by immunostaining in these biopsies, using formalin or hollande's fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues and compared it with a control group of various inflammatory conditions to determine whether or not ubiquitin immunostaining would be useful in distinguishing inclusion body myositis from other inflammatory conditions.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The surgical pathology files at the Cleveland Clinic Foundation over a 10-year period (12/85 to 12/95) were searched for cases of inclusion body myositis diagnosed on skeletal muscle biopsy. Only cases in which all light and electron microscopic materials were available in addition to at least one paraffin block of formalin or hollande's fixed skeletal muscle tissue were included for study. All light and electron microscopic materials were reviewed, and only cases with ultrastrucrural evidence of diagnostic tubulofilamentous inclusions measuring 12 to 18 nm in diameter were included for study. A total of 30 patients qualified for study. Light microscopic sections available in all cases included hematoxylin-eosin, Gomori trichrome, esterase, adenosine triphosphatase (pH 4.6 and 9.8), nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide (reduced form), cytochrome C-oxidase, acid phosphatase, alkaline phosphatase, and sulfonated alcian blue.

In each case, light microscopic findings suggestive of inclusion body myositis including the presence of muscle fiber degeneration and regeneration, chronic endomysial inflammation consisting primarily of lymphocytes and macrophages, and rimmed vacuoles were documented. Fibrosis and neurogenic changes (as evidenced by angular atrophic esterasepositive staining muscle fibers or fiber type grouping) were noted. Light microscopic findings suggestive of mitochondrial abnormalities including a partial absence of cytochrome Coxidase staining or ragged red fibers were also documented. In each case, electron micrographs were reviewed for evidence of tubulofilamentous structures either within the myocyte nucleus or cytoplasm as confirmation of the diagnosis. In addition, ultrastructural evidence of rimmed vacuoles, amyloid deposition, and paracrystalline mitochondrial inclusions were noted.

In each case, immunostaining with ubiquitin antibody (dilution 1:10,000; Chemicon International, Inc, Temecula, CA) was performed on sections generated from paraffin-embedded, formalin, or hollande's fixed material, utilizing an avidin-biotinylated immunoperoxidase methodology previously described. 15 Appropriate positive and negative controls were performed. In seven patients, two slides from different muscle biopsy sites were immunostained with ubiquitin. A control group of eight patients including three with polymyositis, three with dermatomyositis, one with necrotizing vasculitis (polyarteritis nodosa), and one with granulomatous myositis were also similarly immunostained with ubiquitin.

RESULTS

Thirty patients with a pathologically confirmed diagnosis of inclusion body myositis comprised this study   Light microscopic findings suggestive of inclusion body myositis were observed in all cases and included scattered degenerating and regenerating muscle fibers accompanied by chronic endomysial and perivascular inflammation consisting primarily of lymphocytes and macrophages (Fig 1). Rimmed vacuoles consisting of cytoplasmic clear spaces containing basophilic material on a trichrome stain were observed in all biopsies. Likewise, scattered angular atrophic esterase-positive muscle fibers were present in biopsies from all 30 patients. Evidence of denervation with reinnervation manifest as fiber type grouping was observed in eight patients (27%). Small areas of endomysial fibrosis were noted in biopsies from six patients. Rare nemaline rods were noted on the trichrome stain in one case. Occasional ragged red fibers characterized by a peripheral rim of red staining material on trichrome stain were observed in biopsies from 5 of 30 patients (17%). A partial cytochrome oxidase deficiency as evidenced by scattered cytochrome oxidase-negative fibers was observed in 10 of 29 patients (34%) in whom an adequate cytochrome oxidase stain was available for examination; in one case, the quality of the cytochrome oxidase stain precluded interpretation.

Tubulofilamentous intranuclear or cytoplasmic inclusions, ranging in size from 12 to 18 nm in diameter, and autophagic vacuoles were observed on electron micrographs in all 30 patients (Fig 2). Paracrystalline mitochondrial inclusions were seen ultrastructurally in five cases (17%) (Fig 3). Electron microscopic evidence of amyloid deposition was noted in 2 of 30 cases (7%) on review of the electron micrographs.

Ubiquitin immunostaining was p e r f o r m e d in muscle biopsies from all 30 patients. Nonspecific positive nuclear staining was observed in endomysial chronic inflammatory cells, scattered myocyte nuclei, and endothelial cell nuclei in all biopsies. Discrete round or oval myocyte intranuclear inclusions were observed in biopsies from 14 of 30 (47%) patients (Fig 4). Ubiquitinpositive cytoplasmic inclusions were focally identified in biopsies from 24 of 30 patients (80%) (Fig 5). Ubiquitin-positive staining of rimmed vacuoles was noted in biopsies from 25 of 30 patients (83%) (Fig 6). Intranuclear inclusions, cytoplasmic inclusions, and rimmed vacuoles highlighted by ubiquitin were all present in 9 of 30 (30%) patients; two of these findings were observed in 15 of 30 patients (50%); and only one finding in 5 of 30 (17%) patients. In only one patient (3%) were none of these findings observed with ubiquitin staining. Diffuse muscle fiber staining was noted focally within biopsies of 21 of 30 patients (70%). Degenerating muscle fibers in many of these cases tended to show a darker diffuse pattern of staining. In the 7 patients  who had two muscle biopsies from different sites stained with ubiquitin, the pattern of immunoreactivity regarding myocyte intranuclear and cytoplasmic inclusions and rimmed vacuoles with ubiquitin was similar in 5 patients. In 2 patients, ubiquitin-staining intranuclear inclusions were identified in only one of the two biopsies.

Muscle biopsies from eight patients with various forms of inflammatory myopathy other than inclusion body myositis were also examined with ubiquitin. This group included two men and six women ranging in age from 29 to 69 years (mean, 56 years). In three cases, a diagnosis of polymyositis characterized by endomysial chronic inflammation, muscle fiber degeneration, and muscle fiber regeneration was made. Diagnosis of dermatomyositis was rendered in three additional patients whose biopsies demonstrated perivascular chronic inflammation, muscle fiber degeneration, muscle fiber regeneration, and perifascicular atrophy. One patient had a necrotizing vasculitis consistent with polyarteritis FIGURE 6. Rimmed vacuole staining positive for ubiquitin (arrow) along with darkly staining cytoplasmic inclusions (short arrow). Nonspecific myocytic cytoplasmic and nuclear staining is also present. (Ubiquitin immunostain; original magnification x400), nodosa, and one patient had multiple nonnecrotizing granulomas with scattered degenerating and regenerating muscle fibers. Similar to the inclusion body myositis biopsies, lymphocytes, myocyte nuclei, and endothelial cell, nuclei stained positive for ubiquitin in all eight cases. There was no evidence of discrete intranuclear or intrasarcoplasmic inclusions by ubiquitin staining. Rimmed vacuoles were not identified by light microscopy or ubiquitin staining in any of the eight cases. Scattered muscle fibers from all eight patients in the control group showed mild diffuse muscle fiber staining with ubiquitin. This staining pattern was interpreted as being nonspecific and was readily distinguishable from the more intense and focal immunostaining characteristics of the intranuclear and intracytoplasmic inclusions or rimmed vacuoles.

DISCUSSION

Ubiquitin is a 76 amino acid polypeptide that is found both free and covalently bound to other proteins in eukaryotic cells. The association of ubiquitin with both rapidly degraded as well as relatively stable regulatory proteins suggests that it may serve several functions in a variety of settings. One of the documented roles for ubiquitin is in the degradation of proteins by nonlysosomal proteolysis. 1~2° Abnormal and short-lived normal proteins are more likely targets for ubiquitin-mediated rapid proteolysis via an adenosine triphos~hatedependent nonlysosomal proteolytic pathway, m23 More stable conjugates of ubiquitin include a whole variety of proteins including histones H2A and H2B, the lymphocyte homing receptor, and a variety of cytoskeletal proteins including actin. 19 ' 23 The exact role of ubiquitin in these more stable conjugates has not been established.

The presence of ubiquitin in inclusion body myositis raises questions concerning the selectivity and rote 13 14 of ubiquitin in this setting. Askanas et al ' reported ubiquitin immunoreactive cytoplasmic inclusions in 10 of 10 patients studied with inclusion body myositis. In her studies, ubiquitin immunostaining was performed on fresh-frozen muscle biopsy material. Ultrastructural localization of the ubiquitin immunoreactivity by indirect peroxidase and gold-labeling techniques localized the ubiquitin immunoreactive material to cytoplasmic tubulofilaments. Immunoreactivity involving rimmed vacuoles and the cellular debris associated with them was not seen. By comparison, 18 control muscle biopsies from a variety of conditions including normal muscle, polymyositis, idiopathic vacuolar myopathy, central core disease, hypokalemic periodic paralysis, denervation atrophy, and mitochondrial myopathy did not show similar ubiquitin immunoreactive inclusions.

In 1993, Albrecht and Bilbao studied a series of 14 cases of inclusion body myositis using ubiquitin immunostaining of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue. 2 In all 14 cases, rimmed vacuoles stained positive for ubiquitin. In 9 of 14 cases, discrete intrasarcoplasmic inclusions were noted to stain positive with ubiqui-tin; in 4 cases, discrete ubiquitin-positive intranuclear inclusions were seen. The control group they chose to use in this study included 4 cases of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and 3 normal muscle biopsy specimens.

To explore the utility of ubiquitin, particularly in the arena of paraffin-embedded tissue, the authors examined their experience with this antibody in patients with ultrastructurally confirmed diagnoses of inclusion body myositis. The authors observed the presence of discrete cytoplasmic ubiquitin-positive inclusions in 80% of patients in this study. Presumably, this positive immunostaining corresponds to the presence of tubulofilamentous structures by electron microscopy. In a smaller percentage of cases (47%), the authors observed discrete intranuclear ubiquitin-positive inclusions. Similar to the cytoplasmic inclusions, positive ubiquitin immunostaining within the myocyte nucleus most likely correlates with the presence of tubulofilaments in this location. The presence of positive staining within rimmed vacuoles was also noted in a high percentage of patients in this series (83%). Presumably, the rimmed vacuoles or autophagic vacuoles consist of a mixture of glycogen material, dense bodies, amorphous granular and fibrillary material, and multilaminated membranous structures. 24 The presence of ubiquitin immunostaining by immunohistochemistry may represent ubiquitination of a variety of proteins targeted for proteolytic degradation. The more diffuse pattern of muscle fiber immunostaining with ubiquitin observed in most biopsies from inclusion body myositis patients appears to be somewhat less specific, in that it was also seen in several of the biopsies from the noninclusion body myositis group in this study.

The presence of ubiquitin positivity associated with the tubulofilamentous structures of inclusion body myositis raises interesting questions. The nature of these filamentous inclusions has been the matter of considerable debate. Initially, they were thought to represent paramyxovirus particles because of their ultrastructural resemblance and supposed immunoreactivity. 24'25 Multiple attempts at confirming this contention by a variety of methodologies has been unsuccessful. 262s The origin and nature of the tubulofilaments remains obscure. Askanas et al as stated that it is unlikely that the tubulofilaments were derived from intermediate cytoplasmic filaments, as has been postulated for other ubiquitinated cytoplasmic type inclusions encountered in other degenerative diseases including Parkinson's disease, Pick's disease, and Alzheimer's disease. 2s'29 Whether or not ubiquitin positive filaments represent accumulation of an abnormal protein or abnormal accumulation of normal proteins that are unable to be degradated because of a malfunction of the ubiquitin associated proteolytic system is not known.

The differential diagnosis of inclusion body myositis most typically includes other forms of inflammatory myopathy. The control group the authors selected for purposes of this study included a variety of such cases. Although the control group consists of a small sampling of commonly encountered inflammatory myopathic conditions, it appears that the discrete cytoplasmic and intranuclear ubiquitin-positive inclusions and positive staining rimmed vacuoles in patients with inclusion body myositis are features that may be potentially helpful in distinguishing inclusion body myositis from other inflammatory myopathic conditions. The combination of a biopsy with inflammatory myopathic findings and characteristic ubiquitin immunostaining may be strongly suggestive of a diagnosis of inclusion body myositis. This may be particularly helpful in cases in which muscle biopsy tissue is not optimally processed for evaluation (ie, frozen for enzyme histochemistry and submitted for electron microscopic evaluation). However, several potential pitfalls must be remembered. First of all, rimmed vacuoles are not exclusively observed in inclusion body myositis and may be seen in a variety of other disorders including spinal muscular atrophy; congenital myopathies; muscular dystrophies; and rarely with other forms of inflammatory myopathy, such as polymyositis. 24 Likewise, the tubulofilamentous structures are not by themselves diagnostic of inclusion body myositis, as they have been described in a variety of other abnormalities including acid maltase deficiency and oculopharyngeal dystrophy, s° Although not specifically examined in this study, one might expect similar patterns of ubiquitin staining of these structures in other disease processes. Ubiquitin immunostaining is optimally used in combination with a consistent clinical history and light microscopic evidence of an inflammatory myopathy.

Recognition of coexistent mitochondrial abnormalities in patients with inclusion body myositis may also provide an additional differential diagnostic clue. Many patients in this series had either light or electron microscopic evidence of mitochondrial abnormalities (ragged red fibers, partial cytochrome oxidase deficiency, or paracyrstalline mitochondrial inclusions). Several recent reports have found evidence of mitochondrial DNA abnormalities in most patients with inclusion body myositis. 8'31'32 The significance of the mitochondrial abnormalities is unknown. Similar mitochondrial changes have been noted in association with normal aging as well as in several other conditions including inflammatory myopathies, such as dermatomyositis and polymyositis. 3a'34 It seems that mitochondrial abnormalities one sees in inclusion body myositis are more frequently encountered than one can simply attribute to increased age or associated inflammation. Amyloid deposition was only observed in two patients on review of electron micrographs. Because most of the electron micrographs were taken before knowledge of the association of/3 amyloid with inclusion body myositis, the incidence of identification of amyloid in this series probably represents an underestimation of the true presence of amyloid in these patients.

Continued research with inclusion body myositis may eventually uncover an origin. In the meantime, it seems that attempts at understanding the pathogenesis of this disorder has resulted in a potentially useful immunostain that can be used for diagnostic purposes on routinely processed, paraffin-embedded muscle.

Acknowledgment. Special thanks to Denise Egleton for her assistance in preparation of this manuscript, and to Kelly Ferguson and Angela Hunt for the excellent immunostaining.

FIGURE 1 .1FIGURE 1. Skeletal muscle biopsy with focal endomysial chronic inflammation, muscle fiber degeneration and variation in muscle fiber size in a patient with inclusion body myositis. (Hematoxylin-eosin stain; original magnification ×200).

FIGURE 2 .2FIGURE 2. Intranuclear tubulofilamentous inclusions (arrow) characteristic of inclusion body myositis. (Original magnification × 13,000).

group. The patients included 19 m e n and 11 women. Patients ranged in age from 29 to 89 years (mean, 64 years).

FIGURE 3 .3FIGURE 3. Paracrystalline mitochondrial inclusions (arrows) indicating a mitochondrial abnormality in an inclusion body myositis patient. (Original magnification × 13,000),

FIGURE 4 .4FIGURE 4. Discrete myocytic intranuclear inclusions highlighted on an ubiquitin immunostained muscle (arrow), (Ubiquitin immunostain; original magnification x400).

FIGURE 5 ,5FIGURE 5, Discrete intracytoplasmic ubiquitin inclusion (arrow). (Ubiquitin immunostain; original magnification x400),

