Safety and efficacy of strength training in patients with sporadic inclusion body myositis

We studied the effects of a 12-week progressive resistance strength training program in weakened muscles of 5 patients with sporadic inclusion body myositis (IBM). Strength was evaluated with Medical Research Council (MRC) scale ratings and quantitative isometric and dynamic tests. Changes in serum creatine kinase (CK), lymphocyte subpopulations, muscle size (determined by magnetic resonance imaging), and histology in repeated muscle biopsies were examined before and after training. After 12 weeks, the values of repetition maximum improved in the least weakened muscles, 25-120% from baseline. This dynamic effect was not captured by MRC or isometric muscle strength measurements. Serum CK, B cells, T-cell subsets, and NK cells remained unchanged. Repeat muscle biopsies did not reveal changes in the number and degree of degenerating fibers or inflammation. The size of the trained muscles did not change. We conclude that a supervised progressive resistance training program in IBM patients can lead to gains in dynamic strength of the least weak muscles without causing muscle fatigue and muscle injury or serological, histological, and immunological abnormalities. Even though the functional significance of these gains is unclear, this treatment modality is a safe and perhaps overlooked means of rehabilitation of IBM patients.

strength training in the maintenance of muscle size and function under normal conditions is well documented. Although there is evidence that such training may be beneficial in the rehabilitation of patients with various neuromuscular disorders, 25,27,34,35 its role in inflammatory myopathies is uncertain because: (a) acute high-intensity exercise is characterized by a transient leukocytosis involving lymphocytes and neutrophils, with increased numbers of natural killer (NK) and cytotoxic T cells 13,15,19,29 that may enhance the endomysial inflammation; (b) eccentric (lengthening) exercise causes myalgia, 7 increased levels of creatine kinase (CK), 7,19,28,31 and focal endomysial inflammation 14,16,19,23 that could potentially worsen the myopathic features; and (c) up to five days after exercise, levels of cytokines are increased, including interleukin-1␤, 5,14 that may enhance muscle fiber destruction. Consequently, in patients with IBM in whom there is a primary immunological alteration in skeletal muscle, the question arises whether routine or therapeutic exercise might stimulate the trafficking to the muscle of previously sensitized immune effector cells, thereby enhancing muscle fiber destruction and deleteriously affecting muscle strength. Therefore, we designed the following pilot study to evaluate: (a) the safety of progressive resistance exercise training in IBM patients emphasizing concentric (shortening) contractions in variously affected muscle groups; (b) alterations in blood chemistry and histoimmunopathological markers of muscle injury; and (c) changes in strength and size of exercised muscles.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Patient Selection. Five patients (1 woman, 4 men) between the ages of 50 and 74 years (mean, 66.4 years) with clinicopathologic confirmation of IBM participated in this study. Individuals were selected from our large IBM population based on their ability to perform heavy resistance exercise in both lower extremities and one upper extremity assessed by baseline testing, as described below. All patients had steady progressive decline in strength and function over the previous 4-9 years (mean duration of symptoms, 6.2 years). Four of 5 patients had no therapeutic response to previous immunological treatment with either prednisone or intravenous immunoglobulin. Confirmation of IBM was based on histological demonstration of endomysial inflammation, phagocytosis, atrophic fibers scattered or in small groups, rimmed vacuoles, and filamentous inclusions by electron microscopy. Patients underwent cardiorespiratory screening to exclude other medical illnesses that might prevent them from participation.

The study was approved by the Institutional Review Boards of the National Institutes of Health and the University of Maryland, and the patients signed an informed consent prior to enrollment.

Experimental Design. Baseline Phase. Patients assessed their level of generalized fatigue using the Fatigue Severity Scale, 20 and ability to perform various activities of daily living with the Barthel Index. 24 Isometric, dynamic and Medical Research Council 26 (MRC)-derived measurements of strength were made of both sets of knee flexors and extensors and right elbow and wrist flexors. Lymphocyte subpopulations, levels of CK and cytokines, and epinephrine and cortisol, hormones which stimulate an acute immune response to high-intensity exercise, were determined at baseline and periodically throughout training. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans were performed on both thighs and one arm. Biopsy of the biceps in 2 patients and vastus lateralis in the other 3 patients was then performed. Patients refrained from any form of regular exercise for the following 4 weeks, but continued their routine activities.

Exercise Training Phase. Patients underwent a training program consisting of three sets (10, 15, and 20 repetitions) of knee extension and flexion of both lower extremities, and right elbow flexion and wrist flexion three times per week on nonconsecutive days for 12 weeks, as described previously. 34 Briefly, initial resistance levels for the concentric phase of exertion of all three sets were performed at approximately five repetition maximum (5RM). Subjects were able to complete the required number of repetitions upon reaching fatigue by reducing the resistance just enough so that a few more repetitions could be completed. The process was repeated until the required number of repetitions for a given set were completed. Each week the pneumatic load was readjusted to accommodate strength gains of each patient. Upper and lower extremity exercises were alternated to minimize fatigue, with a rest interval of approximately 90 s between sets of repetitions, and 3 min between exercises. The eccentric phase of activity was minimized by having the limb return to the original position rapidly (approximately 2 s). At the end of the first six training sessions, and periodically thereafter, blood samples were taken, and the Fatigue Severity Scale and Barthel Index were completed.

Posttraining Assessment. On the last day of study, Fatigue Severity Scale and Barthel Index were assessed. Isometric, dynamic, and MRC determinations of strength of trained muscles were made, fol-lowed by drawing of blood samples. MRI studies and muscle biopsies were repeated on the same muscles originally evaluated.

Strength Assessments. Details of the methods of strength assessment have been described previously. 17,34 Patients participated in several lowintensity exercise sessions to familiarize themselves with the exercise equipment prior to testing and training. At the beginning of each exercise session, seated blood pressure and heart rate were recorded, and patients completed a 3-min warm-up on a stationary bicycle, followed by 10 min of static stretching. MRC scale determinations were made by the same neurologist before and after completion of the training program.

Baseline and posttraining levels of dynamic strength were determined on pneumatic, variable resistance (Keiser K-300) exercise machines implementing a three-repetition maximum (3RM) test, defined as the maximal resistance that could be moved through the complete range of motion for three repetitions. The safety and validity of this measure of strength has been documented previously. 17,34 Peak isometric torque was measured in the trained muscle groups using a Kin/Com dynamometer (Chattex Corp., Chattanooga, TN). The best of three trials was recorded as peak torque for 120°k nee extension, 90°knee flexion, 120°elbow flexion, and 180°wrist flexion. Three minutes of rest were allowed between trials. Repeat specimens were taken from regions approximately 5 cm lateral to the initial biopsy site to avoid sampling tissue damage induced from the initial biopsy. Muscle specimens were frozen in isopentane cooled in liquid nitrogen, and 10-µm frozen sections were processed for routine muscle enzyme histo-chemistry and histopathology. In addition, serial 4-µm frozen sections were processed for immunocytochemistry using one of the following monoclonal antibodies and peroxidase-coagulated goat antimouse immunoglobulin IgG as previously described 18,21 : CD4+ cells, CD8+ cells, macrophages (Ber-Mac), NK (CD56) cells, and CD56+ muscle fibers [marker of neural cell adhesion molecule (N-CAM)-positive cells, indicative of muscle regeneration] were counted in each muscle before and after training at a magnification of 100× on three randomly selected fields. Magnetic Resonance Imaging. MRI studies were performed using a Picker Vista 0.5-T whole body scanner (Picker International, Highlands Heights, OH). T1-weighted (repetition time 400 ms, echo time 10 ms, receptive field 90°) spin-echo images using a 160 by 256 matrix and six repetitions (nose to ear to xiphoid) were made in the transverse plane through one upper arm and both thighs. Tenmillimeter gaps were used as needed to cover the anatomy in 18 axial sections. Images were transferred via network to a VoxelQ II quantitative imaging workstation (Picker International, Highland Heights, OH). Comparable levels based on bony landmarks and blood vessels were selected for consistent measurement over serial examinations by one examiner, who was unaware of the training status for each image. The midbelly cross-sectional area of muscle was calculated by defining a range of signal intensities that corresponded to muscle only, and then determining the area that corresponded to that range of values.

Statistical Analyses. Data are presented as means ± standard errors. Analyses of dependent observations for each patient, before and after training, were performed for each of the study parameters using one-tailed paired t-tests.

RESULTS

Assessment of Fatigue and Activities of Daily Liv-

ing. The strength training program did not lead to significant changes in generalized fatigue. Mean Fatigue Severity Scale score was 5.5 ± 0.5 at baseline, and 5.2 ± 0.4 after training. Similarly, the Barthel Score at baseline (2.2 ± 0.1) was not significantly different after 12 weeks of strength training (2.1 ± 0.1). Patients did not complain of muscle pain or soreness during any phase of the training study. Three of the 5 patients indicated that the exercise training impacted positively on some aspects of daily functions, including ability to climb stairs, rise from a squatting position, or lift an object with their hands.

Strength Evaluations. No changes were observed in the group mean MRC ratings for any of the exercise-trained muscle groups (data not shown). Changes of no more than one half MRC grade for a particular muscle group were seen with training. On the other hand, all individuals demonstrated some degree of improvement in 3RM values (except right leg extension of patient ն5) for each of the eight training exercises after 12 weeks, with group mean increases of between 25% and 120% (Table 1). Statistically significant increases were determined for five of eight exercises. The greatest gains in strength were seen in muscle groups which were least affected at the onset of training based on MRC ratings of strength (Fig. 1). Conversely, muscle groups with the lowest MRC scores at the onset of training achieved the least amount of improvement after 12 weeks of strength training. Nearly all patients demonstrated some degree of improvement in maximal peak torque production for all muscle groups tested (except right and left knee flexion, right wrist flexion of patient ն3; right elbow fexion of patient ն4). Although group mean values for peak isometric torque production of all muscle groups were greater after training, statistical significance was not demonstrated (Table 2).

Muscle Size. Significant changes in whole muscle cross-sectional area assessed by MRI were not seen in any of the muscles of patients as a result of training.

Serum Markers of Muscle Injury and Endocrine Func-

tion. Serum CK levels ranged from 265 IU/L to 1684 IU/L at the onset of training, and remained essentially unchanged throughout the course of exercise training (Fig. 2). Similarly, no significant changes in serum epinephrine or cortisol levels, as-sessed within 10 min of cessation of each exercise session, were seen after the first, second, or last training session (Table 3).

Lymphocyte Subpopulations and Cytokines. Values for total numbers of B cells, NK cells, T cells, and

T-cell subsets were not significantly altered after the completion of either the first, second, or 36th session of exercise (Table 3). In addition, no differences in the presence of activation markers (IL-DR, HLA-DR) on CD4 or CD8 cells were observed with training.

Cytoimmunohistochemistry. All muscles evaluated before training displayed varying degrees of endo- mysial inflammation, with the presence of macrophages, CD4+ cells, and CD8+ cells. In addition, scattered muscle cells staining positive for CD56 were found. No significantly consistent changes in infiltrates or numbers of these cell markers were found after training.

DISCUSSION

Strength training has previously been excluded in the treatment of patients with inflammatory myopathies, other than to prevent flexion contractures with passive exercise, due to the unsubstantiated belief that such activity exacerbates inflammation and damage in muscles of these patients. 4,30 Our results in patients with IBM demonstrate that significant gains in dynamic muscle strength may occur without evidence of immunocytotoxic exacerbation or muscle injury following 12 weeks of high-resistance strength training. Though this is the first study to document such an effect in patients with IBM, previous reports support the notion that a carefully designed and supervised strength training program can be applied safely and efficaciously in patients with polymyositis and dermatomyositis, 10 as well as a variety of neuromuscular disorders. 1,25,27,34,35 We have confirmed that serum CK, 14,17,24 a marker of muscle cell disruption, did not change significantly in IBM patients undergoing progressive resistance high-intensity strength training. Similarly, we did not observe changes in the serum levels of epinephrine, cortisol, or the subpopulations and state of activation of circulating and endomysial lymphocytes immediately after the first two sessions of acute exercise or after 12 weeks of training, indicating that the applied progressive resistance training program did not modify these immunological parameters in IBM patients.

The greatest gains in 3RM strength were seen in knee flexors, which are the least affected muscles in IBM patients. Other muscle groups which are affected earlier and more extensively during progression of this disease were less responsive to strength training. It is likely that this differential effect of strength training is dependent on the extent to which the particular muscle retains a population of unaffected muscle fibers. Muscles least affected histologically by the disease process probably have the greatest reserve for muscle contraction and force development in response to a strength training stimulus. In addition, it is also possible that these muscles have experienced some degree of disuse due to the extensive weakness and atrophy of their antagonist muscles, allowing them to respond more favorably to the strength training program. Strength training, therefore, may provide benefit, and possibly delay the progression of muscle weakness and atrophy in certain muscle groups of IBM patients, when applied in the early stages of the disease, when the number of muscle fibers capable of responding is still relatively large.

In spite of the documented gains in dynamic strength, the MRC scale ratings did not change by more than one half grade after 12 weeks of training, probably due to insensitivity of the MRC grading system to detect minor changes in muscle strength. The same applies for isometric strength, which also did not change in our patients, confirming previous studies that gains achieved from a dynamic progressive strength training program may not be captured by isometric measures. 3,32,34 Three of 5 patients indicated that they were better able to perform specific physical activities after 12 weeks of training. These changes were not captured by the Barthel Index of Activities of Daily Living, which remained unchanged. Improvements in activities of daily living after completion of a similar progressive resistance strength training program have been documented for older individuals who, like patients with IBM, undergo loss of muscle mass and subsequent disability with ageing. 11,12 Because patients with IBM have asymmetric degrees of weakness of various muscles of the extremities, changes in functional performance will depend upon the extent to which certain muscle groups have been affected by the disease process. It appears that muscles least affected should potentially improve to the greatest extent after strength training, whereas those activities which rely primarily on the weakest muscle groups may not improve to as great an extent.

While the short-term strength training program implemented in this study was safe and elicited improvements in dynamic strength without producing fatigue, the therapeutic benefit of long-term progressive resistance exercise in patients with IBM remains to be determined. Based on our preliminary studies utilizing progressive resistance exercise in patients with IBM and postpolio syndrome, 34 it appears that this treatment modality may be an overlooked means of rehabilitation in patients with myopathies and other neuromuscular disorders. 

Baseline

Training session ն1

Training session ն2

Training session ն36

White blood cells (K/mm −3 ) 6.66 ± 0. None of the differences between baseline and posttraining for each parameter were statistically significant.

Blood Samples. Serum levels of CK were measured at baseline, after the first six training sessions, and after the third, sixth, ninth, and 12th weeks of training. Serum levels of cortisol and epinephrine, and immunophenotyping of the following lymphocyte subpopulations were performed by multicolor flow cytometry at baseline, after the first two training sessions, and at the completion of training: B cells: CD20; NK cells: CD16/56; T cells; T-cell subsets: CD4+, CD8+; and activated T cells: CD4/IL-2R, CD8/IL-2R, CD4/HLA-DR, CD8/HLA-DR. Muscle Histopathology and Immunocytochemistry. Each patient underwent an open biopsy of either biceps or vastus lateralis muscle 4 weeks before, and the day following the completion of training.

FIGURE 2 .2FIGURE 2. Serum levels of creatine kinase prior to strength training (B), during the three orientation sessions (T1-T3), and periodically throughout the 36 training sessions (T4-T36) in patients with IBM. Upper limit of normal for serum CK is 386 IU/L.

Dr. I.M. Feuerstein is on the faculty of the Department of Radiology, Uniformed Services University for the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD. The authors wish to thank Joseph Gillespie for technical assistance in training and strength evaluations of the patients at the Exercise Science Laboratory at the University of Maryland, and Jackie Lopez-Divine for supervising various technical aspects of this study.

Table 2 .2Mean (± SE) peak isometric torque values (Nm) for the six exercise-trained muscle groups at baseline and after 12 weeks of strength training.%Baseline PosttrainingimprovementRight knee extension 109 ± 42144 ± 3754 ± 17(9-264)(18-218)Left knee extension80 ± 36132 ± 2893 ± 40(18-218)(22-250)Right knee flexion180 ± 32206 ± 2518 ± 20(123-290)(86-310)Left knee flexion183 ± 11202 ± 257 ± 16(142-207)(70-260)Right elbow flexion114 ± 32138 ± 4133 ± 22(53-233)(71-266)Right wrist flexion73 ± 3386 ± 4027 ± 17(23-203)(31-233)The range of peak torque values for each muscle group, at baseline and after training, are listed in parentheses. Differences between baseline and posttraining for each muscle group were not statistically significant.

Table 1 .1Mean (± SE) 3RM values (kg) for the eight training exercises at baseline and after 12 weeks of strength training. Mean percent change in dynamic strength, using the 3RM test (see text) of the six muscle groups after 12 weeks of strength training in patients with IBM. Group mean MRC score for each muscle group is listed to the right (correlation coefficient = 0.80).Baseline Posttraining % improvementRight leg press124 ± 14169 ± 14*39 ± 12Left leg press128 ± 13180 ± 16*42 ± 14Right leg curl11 ± 123 ± 3*120 ± 20Left leg curl12 ± 124 ± 3*106 ± 19Right leg extension10 ± 313 ± 251 ± 26Left leg extension10 ± 214 ± 2*60 ± 20Biceps curl9 ± 211 ± 225 ± 12Wrist curl8 ± 413 ± 779 ± 27*Significant (P < 0.05) improvement as a result of training. FIGURE 1.

