Light and Electron Microscopic Immunolocalization of Presenilin 1 in Abnormal Muscle Fibers of Patients with Sporadic Inclusion-Body Myositis and Autosomal-Recessive Inclusion-Body Myopathy

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM) is the most common progressive muscle disease of older per- sons. The muscle biopsy demonstrates mononuclear celi inflammation and vacuolated muscle fibers con- taining paired helical filaments and 6-to 10-nm fibrils, both resembling those of Alzheimer disease brain and Congo red positivity. The term hereditary inclusion-body myopathies (h-IBMs) designates auto- somal-recessive or autosomal-dominant disorders with muscle biopsies cytopathologically similar to s- IBM but without inflammation. Vacuolated muscle fibers of both s-IBM and the h-IBMs contain accumu- lations of several "Alzheimer-characteristic proteins" including 8-amyloid protein and 8-amyloid precursor protein, and their paired helical filaments are com- posed of phosphorylated tau. We used six well characterized antibodies against several residues of prese- nilin 1 (PS1) to immunostain muscle biopsies of 12 patients with s-IBM, 5 patients with autosomal-reces- sive inclusion-body myopathy, and 16 normal and disease controls. Seventy to eighty percent of the vacuolated muscle fibers of both s-IBM and autosomalrecessive inclusion-body myopathy had inclusions that were strongly PS1-miunoreactive, which by immunoelectron microscopy localized mainly to paired helical filaments and 6-to 10-nm filaments. None of the control biopsies had PS1-positive inclusions char- acteristic of the s-and h-IBM abnormal muscle fibers.

Mutations of the newly discovered PS1 gene are re- sponsible for early-onset familial Alzheimer disease (AD), and PS1 is abnormally accumulated in sporadic and familial AD brain. Our study provides the first demonstration of PS1 abnormality in non-neural tis- sue and in diseases other than AD and suggests that the cytopathogenesis in AD brain and IBM muscle may share similarities. (Am J Patbol 1998, 152:889-895) Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM) is the most common muscle disease beginning in persons age 55 years or older.1 It is of unknown etiology and pathogenesis, and leads to severe disability. Light microscopic features of the s-IBM muscle biopsy include various de- grees of mononuclear-cell inflammation, muscle fibers with characteristic vacuoles on Engel-Gomori trichrome staining,2 and atrophic muscle fibers.1 On a given sec- tion, 60 to 80% of the vacuolated muscle fibers contain foci positive with Congo red, thioflavine S, or crystal violet.1,3-5

Hereditary inclusion-body myopathies (h-IBMs) en- compass several syndromes, each characterized by pro- gressive muscle weakness but having somewhat differ- ent clinical manifestations.1 h-IBMs are inherited either as an autosomal-recessive or autosomal-dominant trait.1 Abnormal genes have not yet been identified. In autoso- mal-recessive h-IBM characterized by relative sparing of quadriceps muscle, linkage to chromosome 9p1-ql has been established,6-8e9 but the abnormal gene has been not yet identified; this h-IBM has been designated as AR1BlBM.8  The clinical onset of h-IBM is usually in the

second or third decade or sometimes earlier. 1 Muscle biopsies of the h-IBMs contain vacuolated muscle fibers similar to s-IBM but with no inflammation. To emphasize the hereditary aspect and lack of inflammation, we intro- duced the term "hereditary inclusion-body myopathy".10 In contrast to s-IBM, in h-IBM patients most of the vacu- olated muscle fibers lack foci of positivity with Congo red (even with the enhancement technique11) or crystal violet.

By electron microscopy, characteristic features of the vacuolated muscle fibers are similar between s-and h-IBM; for example, there are cytoplasmic, 15-to 21-nm diameter paired helical filaments (PHFs) that strikingly resemble PHFs of Alzheimer disease (AD) brain. 5 A remarkable feature of s-and h-IBM-vacuolated mus- cle fibers is that a group of proteins are abnormally accumulated in the brain of AD patients. Those include: ,B-amyloid protein (Af),' C-and N-terminal regions of P-amyloid precursor protein (f3APP),12 apolipoprotein E,13 ubiquitin,14 and a1-antichymotrypsin.15 3APP mRNA is also increased in s-and h-IBM vacuolated muscle fibers.16 Like Alzheimer PHFs, IBM PHFs contain hyper- phosphorylated tau; however, its expression is qualita- tively different between s-and h-IBMs.17

Mutations in the recently discovered gene of presenilin 1 (PS1) on chromosome 14 account for the majority of familial early onset AD patients.18-21 Despite lack of PS1 mutations in sporadic AD, abnormal accumulation of PS1 occurs in the brain of both sporadic and familial AD. 22-27  To our knowledge, there are no reports concerning abnormality of PS1 in any non-Alzheimer human dis- eases.

We now report that PS1 is abnormally accumulated in vacuolated muscle fibers of s-and h-IBMs as revealed by light and electron microscopic immunocytochemistry. This study provides the first demonstration of PS1 abnormality in diseases other than AD and in a tissue other than the brain, namely human muscle.

Materials and Methods Patients

Immunocytochemistry was performed on sections of di- agnostic muscle biopsies obtained (with informed con- sent) from 34 patients, age 34-79 years, with the follow- ing diagnoses: s-IBM (n = 12); quadriceps sparing autosomal-recessive IBM (AR1-IBM) (n = 5); polymyosi- tis (n = 5); amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (n = 5); morpho- logically nonspecific myopathy (n = 2); normal muscle (n = 4). Diagnosis of each patient was based on detailed clinical and laboratory studies, including 18 reaction his- tochemistries of the muscle biopsy.28 Biopsies of all IBM patients showed muscle fibers with vacuoles on Engel-Gomori staining,2 and 15-to 21-nm paired helical fila- ments by electron microscopy and by SMI-31 immunore- activity.29 All s-IBM patients had, in 60 to 80% of their vacuolated muscle fibers, Congo red positivity using flu- orescence enhancement.11

Antibodies

Six well characterized polyclonal and monoclonal anti- bodies against several epitopes of PS1, including N- terminal, PS1 loop, and C-terminal domains, were used: 1) mouse monoclonal antibody X-81 reacting with N- terminal epitope of PS1, amino acids 1-81,30 diluted 1:500; 2) rabbit polyclonal antiserum (a-PS1 loop) react- ing with amino acids 263-407 of the PS1 loop,31 diluted 1:200 to 1:600; 3) mouse monoclonal antibody against a glutathione S-transferase-fusion protein containing amino acid residues 12-69 of the PS1 N-terminal region (V. M.-Y. Lee, unpublished data), diluted 1:500; 4) rabbit polyclonal antiserum (anti-PS1-395) against C-terminal residues 395-41 o,24 diluted 1:50 to 1: 100; 5) rabbit poly- clonal antiserum (anti-PS1-448) against C-terminal resi- dues 448-467,24 diluted 1:100 to 1:200; and 6) rabbit polyclonal antiserum (4627) against C-terminal residues 450-467,30 diluted 1:500. The last three antibodies react with the C-terminal epitopes of PS1 and PS2.

Mouse monoclonal antibody SMI-31 (Sternberger Monoclonals, Inc., Baltimore, MD) directed against 200- kd-phosphorylated mammalian neurofilament but recog- nizing phosphorylated tau in IBM muscle and AD brain 172932 was used to identify bundles of PHFs in double immunofluorescence stainings.

Light Microscopic Immunocytochemistry

Stainings were performed on 10-,um transverse sections of fresh-frozen muscle biopsies using peroxidase-antiperoxidase (PAP) and fluorescence methods, as de- scribed.4 5'12 17 Incubation in all primary antibodies, ex- cept SMI-31, was performed for 18 to 36 hours at 4°C and was followed by a 1-hour incubation with an appropriate secondary antiserum at room temperature.4'5'12 15   Controls for staining specificity were: 1) preabsorption of the primary PS1 antibodies with corresponding pep- tides and 2) omission of the primary antibody or its re- placement with nonimmune serum. To block nonspecific binding of antibody to Fc receptors, sections were pre- incubated with 1:10-diluted normal goat serum as de- scribed.5'12 15   Immunoelectron Microscopy This was performed using 10-,tm unfixed frozen sections adhered to the bottom of 35-mm Petri dishes according to our technique.4 5'12 15 In brief, after incubation for 36 hours at 4°C in a primary antibody, the sections were incubated in either gold-(78 hours at 40C) or HRP-(1 hour at room temperature) conjugated secondary anti- serum. Adjacent sections were processed for the PAP reaction. Subsequently, the sections were fixed in a 2% paraformaldehyde and 1.2% glutaraldehyde mixture, postfixed in osmium, and embedded in Epon in situ in the Petri dish according to our method for cultured muscle.32

The embedded section in the dish was viewed under phase-contrast microscopy and compared with an adjacent cross-section that had been incubated with the Light microscopic immunocytochemistry of s-IBM (A to C and G to L) and h-IBM (D to F) muscle biopsies. A to F: PAP reaction. G to L: Double-labeled immunofluorescence. Antihodies used: X-81 (A, E, and G); al loop PS1 (B, D, and K); monoclonal against a glutathione S-transferase-fusion protein (C and E); anti-PS1-448 (E and l); and SMI-31 recognizing phosphorylated tau (H, J, and L). With all antibodies in both s-and h-IBM, strongly immunoreactive inclusions of various sizes are present within the abnormal muscle fibers. By douLble-labeled flLorescence in each pair, respectively, (G, H, I, J, K, and L) there is a close colocalization between PSI and SMI-31 immunoreactivities. Fluorescein (G, I, and K); Texas Red (H, J, and L). Magnification, X600. same antibody as for immunoelectron microscopy but stained with the PAP reaction. The identical vacuolated muscle fibers that contained PAP-positive inclusions were identified in the adjacent gold-labeled Epon-em- bedded section, were marked, and 1-mm diameter cores were drilled out.33 From the cores, each containing at least one vacuolated muscle fiber, thin sections were cut, counterstained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate, and examined by electron microscopy.

Results

Light Microscopic Immunocytochemistry

About 70 to 80% of the vacuolated muscle fibers of both s-and h-IBM patients were immunoreactive with PS1 antibodies. PS1 immunoreactivity with all antibodies was in the form of well-defined, squiggly or plaque-like, strongly positive inclusions either within the vacuoles or in the vacuole-free cytoplasm (Figure 1). All antibodies gave exactly the same results except the antibody PS1-395, which gave only a very faint staining. This antibody is considered good for immunoblotting but not for tissue immunostaining (T. Wisniewski, unpublished observa- tion). In s-IBM (Figure 1, A to C), the cytoplasm of most of abnormal fibers did not have diffusely increased immu- noreactivity. However, in patients with h-IBM (Figure 1, D to F), some of the vacuolated muscle fibers had, in ad- dition to the inclusions, a diffuse cytoplasmic PS1 immu- noreactivity. In double-label fluorescence immunocyto- chemistry, there was close colocalization between the PS1 and SMI-31 immunoreactive deposits (Figure 1).

Preabsorption with corresponding peptides abolished or markedly diminished the stainings.

None of the control biopsies had PS1-positive inclu- sions characteristic of the s-and h-IBM abnormal muscle fibers. Strong immunoreactivity of PS1 was present at the postsynaptic domain of NMJ in all biopsies -normal, disease control, and the IBMs (not shown).

In regenerating muscle fibers from patients with vari- ous muscle diseases, diffuse cytoplasmic PS1 immuno- reactivity was often present (not shown).

Immunoelectron Microscopy

In both s-and h-IBM, ultrastructural immunoreactivities with all antibodies were remarkably similar. They were localized mainly to the PHFs (Figure 2). In addition, PS1 was also localized to 6to 10-nm diameter amyloid-like fibrils and amorphous material (Figure 2). There was no PS1 immunoreactivity associated with the myofibrils, my- elin-like whorls, various lysosomal inclusions, and other pathological and normal structures present in vacuolated muscle fibers from sor h-IBM patients.

Discussion

PS1 is a newly discovered protein encoded by a gene on chromosome 14.19 It has 467 amino acids with six to eight transmembrane domains.34 36 The PS1 mRNA and protein are abundantly expressed in various tis- sues,1830'37 and the expression PS1 mRNA is develop- mentally regulated.37 The physiological functions of PS1 Figure 2. Immunoelectron microscopy of abnormal muscle fibers in hereditary (A) and sporadic (B to G) IBMs. Antibodies used: al loop PS1 (A, D, F, and G);

X-81 (B); and monoclonal against a glutathione S-transferase-fusion protein (C and E). In A to E, immunoreactivity is localized strictly to the paired-helical filaments (in a cluster), whereas an adjacent portion of a normal myofibril (indicated by an asterisk in each photograph) and other structures (indicated by arrows in D) are not immunostained. A to D: Peroxidase reaction; E, F, and G: gold immunoelectron microscopy using 10-nm gold particles. In F, gold particles partially label 6to 10-nm amyloid-like fibrils; in G they label amorphous material. Magnification, X15,000 (A); X21,000 (B); X33,000 (C); X26,000 (D); X53,500 (E);

X43,000 (F and G).

are not yet known. Based on a high degree of homology to the Caeorhabditis elegans SEL-12 and SPE-4 pro- teins,38 it has been proposed that PS1 may function as a channel or as a transmembrane transporter protein.36

In normal and disease-controls, we found PS1 immu- noreactivity present at the postsynaptic domain of the neuromuscular junctions. Thus, PS1 is a normal neuro- muscular junctional protein and may play a role in the trophic or excitatory interaction between the lower motor neuron and muscle fiber.

Missense mutations in the PS1 gene lead to the most common and aggressive form of familial Alzheimer dis- ease. Despite the fact that there are no mutations of the PS1 gene in sporadic AD, the same abnormal accumu- lations of PS1 occur in the brains of both sporadic and familial Alzheimer patients in which PS1 is immunolocal- ized to the same structures, namely neurofibrillary tan- gles and senile plaques. 22-27   Even though mutations of the PS1 gene experimentally cause increased production of A,B-42 both in vivo and in vitro,3942 this mechanism cannot be responsible for A,B abnormalities present in sporadic AD patients because they do not have PS1 mutations. However, the accumu- lations of PS1 in both sporadic and familial forms of AD suggest that it plays a role in a cerebral pathogenic cascade common to different groups of AD patients.

Our study demonstrates that PS1 is abnormally accu- mulated in muscle fibers of patients with sporadic and PS1 in Inclusion-Body Myositis and Myopathies 893 AJP April 1998, Vol. 152, No. 4   with quadriceps-sparing autosomal-recessive IBM. In both groups, PS1 immunolocalizes to the same structures and with the same intensity. Even though three antibodies used in this study recognize both PS1 and PS2, the other three specifically recognize PSi3031 (V.M.-Y. Lee, unpublished). Therefore, based on our studies, in the IBMs we can access the status of PS1 but not of PS2.

It is of particular interest that in IBM muscle and AD brain, PS1 is immunolocalized mainly to the PHFs (which contain phosphorylated tau) and, to a lesser extent, amy- loid-like fibrils (which contain AP). The mechanism(s) leading to the abnormal accumulation of PS1 within IBM muscle fibers is not known. It is not likely that a mutation of PS1, the product of chromosome-14 gene, is respon- sible for PS1 abnormality in autosomal-recessive IBM because in four genetically studied patients, the linkage was to the chromosome 9p1-q18 (DNA of the fifth patient

has not yet been studied). It is also unknown whether PS1 abnormality in the IBMs precedes or is a consequence of other abnormalities. We propose that in the IBMs, PS1 abnormality may be secondary to abnormal accumula- tion of AP3 and possibly other ,BAPP epitopes because our previous studies demonstrated that abnormalities of ,BAPP precede other changes including congophilia.4'5 '12 Moreover, overexpression of the ,BAPP gene in normal cultured muscle is sufficient to induce IBM-characteristic mitochondrial abnormalities and other aspects of the IBM phenotype.4344

Previously, it was shown that PS1 can form complexes with either 3APP or AP.244546 This phenomenon has been considered relatively specific to AP and pAPP as PS1 immunoreactivity is not associated with other bio- chemical types of amyloid deposits.24 Since in the IBMs there are abnormal accumulations of AP3 and other I3APP epitopes, it is possible that PS1 is binding directly to them, because in the IBMs they4.12 and PS1 localize to the 6to 10-nm diameter fibrils and amorphous material. An additional or alternative possibility is that the patho- logical overaccumulation of ,APP, the whole molecule or its derivative (AP3 fragment), can influence posttransla- tional processing or degradation of PS1, such as leading to its becoming more "sticky" and resulting in its accu- mulation in IBM muscle (and in sporadic AD brain). (A similar role has been suggested for some of the amyloid- associated proteins, such as apolipoprotein E, and their interaction with Af3.47 '48) In support of this proposal are our preliminary in situ hybridization studies (Askanas and Sarkozi, 1997, unpublished), which indicate that PS1 mRNA is not increased in IBM abnormal muscle fibers. Likewise, PS1 mRNA levels were equal in normal and AD brain.49

In s-and h-IBMs, the prominent association of PS1 with the PHFs, which do not contain AP or ,BAPP epitopes, conceivably could be 1) a nonpathogenic adhesion of the PS1 to phosphorylated tau or another of the 10 known components already existing in the IBM PHFs50 or 2) pathogenic adhesion of PS1 to one or more of those PHF components, such as tau, that causes the molecular transformation essential to the formation of the PHFs.

It is of particular interest that s-IBM and all recessive and dominant forms of the h-IBMs have specific patho- logical features in common including: vacuolar degeneration of muscle fibers; filamentous inclusions composed of paired-helical filaments containing phosphorylated tau; and accumulations of PAPP epitopes, apolipoprotein E, other AD-characteristic proteins,1 and now PS1. Two questions are 1) despite their presumably different etiol- ogies, what causes their common AD-like pathological features and 2) do they result from the same ultimate pathogenic cascade occurring in all forms of the IBMs, as we have suggested. 1 9 The same questions relate to AD. Despite three different genetic defects (identified thus far) causing early-onset familial AD and the apolipoprotein E genetic risk factor existing in some late-onset spo- radic AD patients, all forms of AD have virtually the same brain pathology,51 suggesting that there may be an ulti- mate common pathogenic cascade in the familial and sporadic ADs. 51 Moreover, accumulation of PS1 deposits in abnormal muscle fibers of the IBMs enhances the possibility that pathogenic cellular mechanisms in IBM muscle and in Alzheimer disease brain may have similarities.

The proteins pathologically accumulated that are com- mon to the s-and h-IBMs might indicate abnormalities that are key events in their putatively common pathogenic cascade or may reflect other yet unknown events that are the crucial underlying pathogenesis of their muscle fiber weakening, atrophy, vacuolization, and destruction. The same possibilities apply to sporadic and hereditary AD, regarding neuronal deterioration. These possibilities need to be explored.

Conclusions

Our study indicates that abnormal accumulation of PS1 occurs in diseased normal muscle and is not unique to AD brain. Normal and pathological human muscle, including use of cultured normal and genetically ab- normal muscle such as h-IBM,52 can provide living human tissue more readily accessible than brain for a wide range of molecular studies of PS1 synthesis and processing.

Additional studies will be required to determine the precise origin and pathogenic steps of abnormal PS1 accumulation in IBM muscle. Such analysis could lead to a better understanding of PS1 in s-IBM and the h-IBMs and perhaps be directly relevant to Alzheimer disease brain.

Acknowledgments

We thank Drs. Dennis J. Selkoe and Gopal Thinakaran for the generous gifts of antibodies X-81, 4627, and aPS1 loop and their corresponding peptides. Dr. Gopal Thi- nakaran provided helpful comments on the manuscript. Maggie Baburyan provided excellent photographic assistance.

894 Askanas et al  AJP Apil 1998, Vol. 152, No. 4   

Supported in part by grants from the National Institutes of Health and Muscular Dystrophy Association (V. Askanas). C.-C. Yang was supported by the Taiwan National University Hospital.

4 %Ẽ4Figure1. Light microscopic immunocytochemistry of s-IBM (A to C and G to L) and h-IBM (D to F) muscle biopsies. A to F: PAP reaction. G to L: Double-labeled immunofluorescence. Antihodies used: X-81 (A, E, and G); al loop PS1 (B, D, and K); monoclonal against a glutathione S-transferase-fusion protein (C and E); anti-PS1-448 (E and l); and SMI-31 recognizing phosphorylated tau (H, J, and L). With all antibodies in both s-and h-IBM, strongly immunoreactive inclusions of various sizes are present within the abnormal muscle fibers. By douLble-labeled flLorescence in each pair, respectively, (G, H, I, J, K, and L) there is a close

