Nitric oxide-induced oxidative stress in autosomal recessive and dominant inclusion-body myopathies

Autosomal-recessive and autosomal-dominant hereditary inclusion-body myopathies are severe, progressive muscle diseases, characterized pathologically by vacuolated muscle fibres containing paired helical filaments. We immunostained muscle biopsy specimens from quadriceps-sparing autosomal-recessive and autosomaldominant inclusion-body myopathy subjects, diseasecontrol subjects and normal patients, utilizing isoformspecific antibodies against the neuronal and inducible forms of nitric oxide synthase, and antibodies against nitrotyrosine. Approximately 75% of the vacuolated muscle fibres in all recessive and dominant inclusionbody myopathy patients contained inclusions strongly immunoreactive with antibodies against neuronal

Introduction

Nitric oxide (NO) is a short-lived reactive gas, synthesized from L-arginine via the catalytic action of nitric oxide synthase (NOS). NOS has three major isoforms: neuronal, inducible and endothelial, each encoded by a different gene (Dawson and Snyder, 1994;Fo ¨rstermann et al., 1994;Nathan and Xie, 1994). Neuronal NOS (nNOS) is constitutive, and is stimulated mainly by intracellular Ca 2ϩ via calmodulin. Under certain circumstances, increased transcription of nNOS has been demonstrated (Dawson and Snyder, 1994). The inducible NOS (iNOS) is predominantly present in activated macrophages, but it can also be induced through transcription in various other cells. Its increased synthesis can be stimulated by cytokines, inflammation and other pathological processes (Fo ¨rstermann et al., 1994;Nathan and Xie, 1994).

NO is considered to be both an intercellular and intracellular messenger, having many diverse functions (Dawson and Snyder, 1994). Excessive production of NO is © Oxford University Press 1998 and inducible nitric oxide synthase which, by immunoelectron microscopy, were colocalized to clusters of tubulofilaments (previously shown, by us, to be paired helical filaments). Strong nitrotyrosine immunoreactivity was in the form of multiple dots and large granular patches, which ultrastructurally did not immunolocalize to tubulofilaments. Excess intracellular nitric oxide can combine with superoxide to produce highly toxic peroxynitrite, which can nitrate tyrosines of proteins. The presence of nitrotyrosine is indicative of nitric oxide-induced oxidative stress. Our data suggest that oxidative stress plays a role in the pathogenic cascade of hereditary inclusion-body myopathies. postulated to play an important pathogenic role in various diseases, including neurodegenerative, inflammatory and immunological processes (Fo ¨rstermann et al., 1994;Nathan and Xie, 1994). One of the mechanisms by which NO may contribute to the pathogenesis of various diseases involves reaction with superoxide to form the highly reactive, extremely toxic, oxidizing agent peroxynitrite, which in turn nitrates tyrosine components of proteins, resulting in various pathological processes. The presence of nitrotyrosine in a tissue is considered a marker of NO-induced oxidative stress (Crow and Beckman, 1995;Beckman and Koppenol, 1996). NO-induced oxidative stress has been recently demonstrated in Alzheimer's disease (brain) (Good et al., 1996;Smith et al., 1997) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (spinal cord) (Abe et al., 1995;Chou et al., 1996), but its possible role in the pathogenesis of human muscle diseases is largely unknown.

Endothelial NOS has been shown to be immunolocalized in normal mitochondria isolated from several tissues including skeletal muscle (Bates et al., 1996) and to be increased in ragged-red muscle fibres from patients with mitochondrial encephalomyopathies (Ohkoshi et al., 1997).

Recently, nitrotyrosine, nNOS and iNOS have been shown to be abnormally accumulated in vacuolated muscle fibres of sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM) (Yang et al., 1996). All three proteins immunocolocalized with phosphorylated tau and were mainly present on s-IBM paired helical filaments (which appear as less-well-defined 'tubulofilaments' in peroxidase-stained immunoelectron micrographs; see Askanas andEngel, 1993, 1995). To our knowledge, s-IBM is the first human muscle disease in which NO-induced oxidative stress has been demonstrated.

Because muscle biopsies of hereditary inclusion-body myopathies (h-IBM) have several pathological similarities to muscle biopsies of s-IBM, and some differences (reviewed in Askanas and Engel, 1995), we asked whether NO-induced oxidative stress is also associated with autosomal-recessive and autosomal-dominant inclusion-body myopathies (IBM).

Material and methods

Patients

We studied diagnostic muscle biopsies (obtained with informed consent approved by the University of Southern California School of Medicine Protection of Human Subjects Committee) from six Persian-Jewish patients with quadricepssparing autosomal-recessive IBM from five families (reviewed in Askanas and Engel, 1995) and from three siblings with autosomal-dominant IBM (Alvarez et al., 1996). Control biopsies were: polymyositis (seven), dermatomyositis (three), morphologically non-specific-myopathy (seven), Duchenne muscular dystrophy (two), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (three), myaesthenia gravis (one) and normal (five). Diagnosis of all patients was based on clinical and laboratory studies, including 18-reaction histochemistry of the muscle biopsy (Engel, 1967). All h-IBM patients had the typical h-IBM muscle phenotype, including cytoplasmic and nuclear paired helical filaments by electron microscopy and by immunoreactivity with SMI-31 antibody (Askanas and Engel, 1995;Alvarez et al., 1996;Askanas et al., 1996a).

Light microscopic immunocytochemistry

Peroxidase-antiperoxidase and immunofluorescence staining techniques were used, as described previously (Askanas et al., 1992(Askanas et al., , 1993a(Askanas et al., , b, 1994(Askanas et al., , 1996a;;Mirabella et al., 1996a, b), on 10-µm unfixed transverse sections of fresh-frozen muscle biopsies using the antibodies listed in Table 1.

Antibodies against n-and iNOS were previously shown to be isoform-specific by the suppliers and others (Hunot et al., 1996). In our previous studies, the two antibodies had different patterns of immunoreactivity in normal muscle (Yang et al., 1996). iNOS, but not nNOS, was immunoreactive in muscle macrophages (Yang et al., 1996).

The following controls for staining specificity were used: (i) omission of the primary antibody or its replacement with normal rabbit serum; (ii) preabsorption of primary polyclonal antiserum against nitrotyrosine with purified nitrotyrosine (gift from Dr J. S. Beckman). To block non-specific binding of antibody to F c receptors, sections were preincubated with 1 : 10 diluted normal goat serum (Askanas et al., 1992(Askanas et al., , 1993a(Askanas et al., , b, 1994(Askanas et al., , 1996a;;Yang et al., 1996).

Double immunofluorescence was performed using polyclonal antiserum against either nNOS, iNOS or nitrotyrosine, combined with a monoclonal antibody SMI-31, which recognizes phosphorylated tau (Mirabella et al., 1996a), and is used for identification of IBM paired helical filaments (Askanas et al., 1996a). This technique utilized Texas-red and fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-labelled secondary antisera as previously described by us. SMI-31, a mouse antibody directed against 200 kDa phosphorylated mammalian neurofilament (Sternberger and Sternberger, 1983;Sternberger et al., 1985), crossreacts on immunoblots with Alzheimer's disease and IBM paired helical filament-phosphorylated tau (Ksiezak-Reding et al., 1987;Nukina et al., 1987;Mirabella et al., 1996a). In IBM muscle, SMI-31 exclusively stains paired helical filaments (Askanas et al., 1996a;Mirabella et al., 1996a).

Immunoelectron microscopy

This was performed on 10-µm thick unfixed frozen-sections adhered to the bottom of 34-mm Petri dishes, as described by Askanas et al. (1991Askanas et al. ( , 1992Askanas et al. ( , 1993aAskanas et al. ( , b, 1994Askanas et al. ( , 1996a)). In brief, after incubation in a given primary antibody, sections were incubated in either gold-conjugated or HRP (horseradish peroxidase)-conjugated secondary antisera and processed for electron microscopy. The embedded section in the dish was viewed under phase-contrast microscopy. Vacuolated muscle fibres were identified and marked, and 1 mm diameter cores were drilled out. From the cores, each containing at least one vacuolated muscle fibre, thin sections were cut and examined by electron microscopy, either without counterstaining for horseradish-peroxidase reactions or following counterstaining with uranyl acetate and lead citrate for the gold label.

Results

Light microscopy: immunocytochemistry

In all recessive and dominant IBM patients, ~75% of the vacuolated muscle fibres and 5-10% of non-vacuolated fibres were immunoreactive with antibodies against nNOS, iNOS and nitrotyrosine (Figs 1 and 2). Immunoreactivity utilizing antibodies against nNOS and iNOS had the form of welldefined darkly positive inclusions, either within the vacuoles or in the vacuole-free cytoplasm (Figs 1 and 2). By contrast,

Table 1 Dilutions of primary antibodies used in immunocytochemistry

Primary antibody Dilution

Mouse monoclonal against human nNOS (lot 4, Transduction Laboratories) 1 : 10 Rabbit polyclonal against human nNOS (lot 4, Transduction Laboratories) 1 : 100 Mouse monoclonal against human iNOS (lot 12, Transduction Laboratories) 1 : 10 Rabbit polyclonal against human nNOS (lot 7, Transduction Laboratories) 1 : 100 Mouse monoclonal against nitrotyrosine (gift from Dr J. S. Beckman) 1 : 10 Rabbit polyclonal against nitrotyrosine (gift from Dr J. S. Beckman and lot 14693, Upstate Biotechnologies) 1 : 20 SMI-31 mouse monoclonal against phosphorylated neurofilament heavy-chain (Sternberg Monoclonal) 1 : 500 nitrotyrosine immunoreactivity was in the form of small multiple dots or large granular patches (Figs 1 and 2). nNOS and iNOS immunoreactivities colocalized with SMI-31 immunoreactivity in 80-90% of the SMI-31 positive muscle fibres (Fig. 3); however, nitrotyrosine immunoreactivity did not colocalize with SMI-31 immunoreactivity (not shown). The pattern of immunoreactivity with all the antibodies used did not differ between the recessive and the dominant forms of h-IBM.

When the primary antibody was omitted, or was replaced by non-immune serum, the immune reactions did not take place. Preabsorption of the antinitrotyrosine antiserum with purified nitrotyrosine markedly diminished or abolished the staining. None of the control muscle biopsies had NOS or nitrotyrosine immunoreactivity that was characteristic of h-IBM. As in our previous studies (Yang et al., 1996(Yang et al., , 1997)), n-and iNOS, but not nitrotyrosine, were immunolocalized at the postsynaptic domain of the neuromuscular junction in  and D). SMI-31 antibody identifies phosphorylated tau of IBM paired helical filaments (Askanas et al., 1996a). All magnifications ϫ600.

normal and abnormal human muscle fibres, and in regenerating muscle fibres of various diseases.

Immunoelectron microscopy

nNOS and iNOS immunoreactivities were localized mainly to structures having a tubulofilamentous appearance (Fig. 4). The normal parts of the muscle fibres adjacent to the tubulofilaments were not immunoreactive. Nitrotyrosine immunoreactivity was on amorphous-floccular material, 6-10 nm diameter filaments, and very thin (Ͻ 8 nm diameter) threads. Sometimes these were close to tubulofilaments, but the tubulofilaments themselves never contained nitrotyrosine immunoreactivity (Fig. 4). The normal parts of the muscle fibres, including mitochondria and lipofuscin, did not contain nitrotyrosine immunoreactivity.

Discussion

The hereditary h-IBM encompass several syndromes with autosomal-recessive or autosomal-dominant inheritance and progressive muscle weakness (reviewed in Askanas andEngel, 1995, 1998a;Sivakumar and Dalakas, 1996;Askanas, 1997). Clinical onset is usually in the second or third decade.

In the quadriceps-sparing form of autosomal-recessive h-IBM, linkage to chromosome 9p1-q1 has been established in various ethnic groups (Argov et al., 1997;Ikeuchi et al., 1997;Middleton et al., 1997), but the abnormal gene has not yet been identified (Askanas, 1997). In autosomal-dominant h-IBM, the chromosome(s) has not yet been identified. Muscle pathology of the h-IBM resembles s-IBM, but lacks lymphocytic inflammation, hence the terms 'myopathy' versus 'myositis' (Askanas and Engel, 1993). Pathological similarities between the h-IBM and s-IBM include: (i) vacuolar degeneration of muscle fibres; (ii) filamentous inclusions composed of paired helical filaments containing phosphorylated tau, which appear as tubulofilaments in electron micrographs of immunoperoxidase stained sections (Askanas et al., 1994;Mirabella et al., 1996a); and (iii) accumulations of βamyloid precursor protein (βAPP) epitopes (Askanas et al., 1993a), other Alzheimer-characteristic proteins, and prion (Askanas et al., 1993b;reviewed in Askanas and Engel, 1995). In contrast to s-IBM, in the h-IBM: (i) the majority of the vacuolated muscle fibres do not contain Congo-Red positivity (which denotes 'amyloid') (Askanas and Engel, 1995;Mirabella et al., 1996a); and (ii) h-IBM paired helical filaments lack some epitopes of phosphorylated tau (Mirabella et al., 1996a) and do not contain apolipoprotein E (Mirabella et al., 1996b). Tables 2 and 3 illustrate pathological similarities and differences between s-IBM and h-IBM.

The present study demonstrates increased accumulation of nNOS, iNOS and nitrotyrosine in abnormal muscle fibres of autosomal-recessive and autosomal-dominant IBM. The pattern of light microscopy immunoreactivity of nNOS and iNOS was like that of s-IBM, and both enzymes were localized to clusters of tubulofilaments by immunoelectron microscopy, as in s-IBM (Yang et al., 1996). In striking contrast to s-IBM, in the h-IBM abnormal muscle fibre, localized nitrotyrosine was not in the form of well-delineated strongly immunoreactive inclusions like those of nNOS and iNOS localization, but rather in the form of multiple small dots. In addition, electron microscopy showed that nitrotyrosine was not immunolocalized to tubulofilaments in the h-IBMs.

A possible explanation for the slightly distant localization of nitrotyrosine from the NOS might be that the freely diffusible NO moves into the cytoplasm from its site of origin, i.e. the NOS on tubulofilaments/paired helical filaments, and then combines with superoxide to form peroxynitrite, which subsequently nitrates proteins of other subcellular structures. Perhaps the molecular composition or configuration of the paired helical filaments in the h-IBM prevents their being nitrated to form nitrotyrosines (in contrast with s-IBM paired helical filaments which do contain nitrotyrosine).

The difference between the h-IBM and s-IBM regarding the presence of nitrotyrosine on tubulofilaments/paired helical filaments is of special interest. It is not known whether other molecular differences between paired helical filaments of sand h-IBM (Table 3) influence the nitration of proteins. For example, it is not known whether in s-IBM the presence of nitrotyrosine on paired helical filaments is secondary to the immunohistochemically demonstrated greater amount of phosphorylated epitopes of paired helical filament-tau compared with h-IBM (Mirabella et al., 1996a), and/or the presence of ApoE, which is not detectable in paired helical filaments in h-IBM (Mirabella et al., 1996b). Alternatively, (i) the hyperphosphorylation of paired helical filament-tau may be a consequence of the nitrotyrosine on paired helical filaments or (ii) nitrated tyrosine and tau-hyperphosphorylation are independent phenomena of the paired helical filaments. Recently, it has been shown that phosphorylation of  tau protein is, at least partially, mediated through tyrosine phosphorylation/dephosphorylation mechanisms (Lu et al., 1994), and peroxynitrite-mediated nitration of a single residue in the cell-cycle kinase cdc2 can influence tyrosine phosphorylation (Gow et al., 1996). Moreover, it has been shown in vitro that oxidative stress can induce formation of paired helical filaments (Schweers et al., 1995). Whether any of these mechanisms play a role in the IBM remains to be studied. Previously we showed that superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1) and SOD1-mRNA are increased in vacuolated muscle fibres of autosomal-recessive h-IBM and s-IBM (Askanas et al., 1996b), suggesting an attempted protective response of those abnormal muscle fibres to increased superoxides. Superoxides can rapidly combine with increased NO to form the very toxic peroxynitrite, leading to subsequent nitration of tyrosine groups on proteins (Crow and Beckman, 1995;Beckman and Koppenol, 1996). The reasons for increased superoxides in h-IBM and s-IBM are not known. One possibility is that the mitochondrial abnormalities (both known and as yet unknown), including respiratory chain dysfunction, in s-IBM (Oldfors et al., 1995;Santorelli et al., 1996;Desnuelle et al., 1998) are responsible for the generation of reactive oxygen species. However, because h-IBM muscle biopsies do not have (i) ragged-red fibres, (ii) cytochrome c oxidase negative muscle fibres or (iii) mitochondrial DNA deletions (Desnuelle et al., 1998), a mechanism based on mitochondrial abnormalities is not likely to be responsible for the oxidative stress occurring in h-IBM muscle.

We consider that in h-IBM, the lack of several abnormalities present in s-IBM reflects a slightly different, less complete, pathological change. For example, one can speculate that factors associated with the ageing cellular milieu, and possibly with inflammation, both occurring in s-IBM but not in the h-IBM, mediate nitration of proteins on paired helical filaments. s-IBM becomes clinically manifest after the age of 50 years and often between 60 and 80 years, whereas the h-IBM become manifest in the second or third decade of life. In the younger h-IBM muscle fibre, the less aged intracellular environment, lack of lymphocytic inflammation, or the specific h-IBM genetic microclimate may be the aspects leading to less advanced changes of paired helical filaments, including their lack of nitration and lack of congophilia.

The mechanisms and causes leading to the increased accumulation of nNOS and iNOS in the h-IBM are not known, but it is thought that iNOS is accumulated through increased transcription. The mechanism of abnormally accumulated nNOS is not known. Our in situ hybridization studies (in progress) using cDNA probes specific for iNOS and nNOS should help answer these questions.

Of possible relevance to both s-IBM and h-IBM is that β-amyloid protein (Aβ) can induce oxidative stress in a variety of cells (Behl et al., 1994;reviewed in Butterfield, 1997) and can increase NOS in non-muscle cells (Hu and Fakahany, 1993). In Alzheimer's disease brain, increased iNOS was demonstrated in astrocytes adjacent to the Aβcontaining plaques (Wallace et al., 1997). We have shown that Aβ is abnormally accumulated in the vacuolated muscle fibres of s-IBM and h-IBM (Askanas et al., 1992(Askanas et al., , 1993a)). Accordingly, the increased Aβ might be at least partly responsible for the increased NOS in both s-IBM and h-IBM vacuolated fibres.

Because abnormal accumulations of β-amyloid precursor protein (βAPP), including its Aβ portion, and βAPP-mRNA, occur in both s-IBM and h-IBM very early in the disease process, and precede other abnormalities (Askanas et al., 1992;Sarkozi et al., 1993), our current hypothesis is that over-expressed βAPP leads to oxidative stress in the IBM, which subsequently results in other abnormalities (Askanas and Engel, 1998b).

In accord with this hypothesis is our recent demonstration that βAPP overexpression, mediated by βAPP gene transfer into cultured normal human muscle fibres induces several aspects of the IBM phenotype, including vacuolization, cytochrome oxidase deficiency, mitochondrial structural abnormalities (Askanas et al., 1996c(Askanas et al., , 1997)), and increased SOD1 and SOD1-mRNA (Askanas et al., 1996b).

In neither the h-IBM nor s-IBM is the pathogenic cascade well understood. The several forms of h-IBM, having different genetic transmission, probably have different genetic defects, and the aetiology of s-IBM is definitely different but still unknown-possibly viral (Askanas and Engel, 1995;Cupler et al., 1996;Engel et al., 1997). Since s-IBM and the recessive and dominant forms of h-IBM have several characteristic pathological features in common, we have suggested that in all the IBM there is a common pathological cascade into which various genetic (h-IBM) and acquired (s-IBM) dysfunctions (Askanas, 1997;Askanas and Engel, 1998b) funnel.

The present study indicates that oxidative stress might be associated with a pathological cascade of the h-IBM. It also raises the possibility that a potential therapeutic avenue for the h-IBM is reduction of free radicals within the affected muscle fibres, and this might be achievable before the respective genetic defects are identified and become clinically correctable.

Acknowledgements

We wish to thank Dr Joseph Beckman for helpful discussions and the generous gift of his antibodies. Supported in part by grants from the National Institutes of Health, Muscular Dystrophy Association, Sheldon Katz ALS Research Fund and Helen Lewis Research Fund. C.-C.Y. was supported by the National Taiwan University Hospital.

Aβ ϭ β-amyloid protein; βAPP ϭ β-amyloid precursor protein; h-IBM ϭ hereditary-IBM; IBM ϭ inclusion body myopathy; iNOS ϭ inducible NOS; nNOS ϭ neuronal NOS; NO ϭ nitric oxide; NOS ϭ nitric oxide synthase; s-IBM ϭ sporadic-IBM; SOD ϭ superoxide dismutase

Fig. 11Fig.1Light microscopy. Peroxidase-antiperoxidase immunocytochemistry illustrating accumulation of nNOS (A and B), iNOS (C and D) and nitrotyrosine (NT: E and F) in abnormal muscle fibres of autosomal recessive h-IBM. Accumulation of nNOS and iNOS appears as well-defined, strongly immunoreactive inclusions. In C, the inclusion in the centre fibre is along the left surface of the fibre. NT immunoreactivity is in the form of multiple small dots (E) or a large granular patch (F). All magnifications ϫ600.

Fig. 22Fig. 2 Light microscopy. Peroxidase-antiperoxidase immunocytochemistry illustrating accumulation of nNOS, iNOS and nitrotyrosine (NT) in abnormal muscle fibres of autosomaldominant h-IBM. nNOS and iNOS are accumulated in the form of large, dark inclusions. Nitrotyrosine is in the form of either dispersed multiple small dots (C) or clustered dots (D). Magnifications for A, B and D ϫ1200, and for C ϫ600.

Fig. 33Fig. 3 Double-label immunofluorescence illustrating close colocalization of nNOS (A) and iNOS (C) with SMI-31 antibody (Band D). SMI-31 antibody identifies phosphorylated tau of IBM paired helical filaments(Askanas et al., 1996a). All magnifications ϫ600.

Fig. 44Fig.4Immunoelectron microscopy. Low (A and C) and higher (B and D) magnification of horseradish-peroxidase staining illustrating localization of nNOS and iNOS to paired helical filaments. Adjacent parts of normal myofibrils in A and C (lower part of each plate indicated by asterisks) are not stained. E and F show gold immunoelectron microscopy using 10 nm gold particles for nitrotyrosine (NT) immunolocalization. NT is immunolocalized to 8-10 nm filaments and very thin threads (Ͻ8 nm) (E) and to amorphous material in close proximity to paired helical filaments (F). Paired helical filaments themselves (two clusters of paired helical filaments in F are indicated by arrows) do not contain NT immunoreactivity. Adjacent portion of a normal myofibril (E, lower-left, indicated by asterisk) does not contain NT immunoreactivity. Magnifications for A and C ϫ26 000, for B and D ϫ53 000, for E ϫ67 200 and for F ϫ51 000. Bars represent 0.5 µm in A and C and 0.25 µm in B-F.

Table 22Pathological phenotypes of s-IBM and the h-IBMsPathologys-IBMh-IBMsReferenceSimilaritiesVacuolated muscle fibresϩϩAskanas and Engel (1995) reviewUbiquitin* β-amyloid precursor protein* β-amyloid precursor protein-mRNAϩ ϩ ϩϩ ϩ ϩAskanas et al. (1991) Askanas et al. (1993a) Sarkozi et al. (1993)Prion protein*ϩϩAskanas et al. (1993b)Prion protein-mRNAϩϩSarkozi et al. (1994)Tau* with antibodies...-SMI-31ϩϩMirabella et al. (1996a)-AT8ϩϩMirabella et al. (1996a)nNOS*ϩϩYang et al. (1996) and this paperiNOS*ϩϩYang et al. (1996) and this paperDifferencesInflammationϩ-Askanas and Engel (1995) reviewRagged-red fibresϩ-Askanas and Engel (1995) reviewCOX-negative muscle fibresϩ-Askanas and Engel (1995) reviewCongo-red positivityϩ-Askanas and Engel (1995) reviewTau* with antibodies-SMI-310ϩ-Mirabella et al. (1996a)-PHF-1ϩϩ(defined inclusions) (diffuse)Mirabella et al. (1996a)Apolipoprotein E*ϩϩ(defined inclusions) (diffuse)Mirabella et al. (1996b)Nitrotyrosine*ϩϩYang et al. (1996) and this paper(defined inclusions) (multiple dots)*Immunoreactivity. COX ϭ cytochrome oxidase; PHF ϭ paired helical filaments.

Table 33Ultrastructural immunoreactivities of various proteins on paired helical filaments (PHFs) of s-IBM and the h-IBMsProteins-IBMh-IBMReferencePHFsPHFsPHFsSimilarities β-amyloid precursor protein*--Askanas et al. (1993a)Ubiquitin*ϩϩAskanas et al. (1991)Prion protein*ϩϩAskanas et al. (1993b)Phosphorylated tau* with antibodies-SMI-31ϩϩMirabella et al. (1996a)-AT8ϩϩMirabella et al. (1996a)nNOS*ϩϩYang et al. (1996) and this paperiNOS*ϩϩYang et al. (1996) and this paperDifferencesTau* with antibodies-SMI-310ϩ-Mirabella et al. (1996a)-PHF 1ϩ-Mirabella et al. (1996a)Apolipoprotein E*ϩ-Mirabella et al. (1996b)Nitrotyrosine*ϩ-Yang et al. (1996) and this paperNon-EM differenceCongophiliaϩ-Mirabella et al. (1996a)*Immunoreactivity.

