Chloroquine myopathy suggests that tau is degraded in lysosomes: implication for the formation of paired helical filaments in Alzheimer's disease

We have found that amorphous tau deposits in chloroquine myopathy (CM), a vacuolar myopathy induced by the administration of chloroquine, a well-known lysosomotropic agent. The dynamics of tau in CM and immunocytochemistry strongly suggest that the accumulation of tau is due to defective tau degradation in the lysosomal compartment in the muscle. This observation may offer a new view on the formation of paired helical filaments in Alzheimer's disease: this selective protein degradation pathway may be defective and result in intracellular accumulation of tau, thereby forming the unusual filaments.

Introduction

tau, a microtubule-associated phosphoprotein, plays an important role in maintaining neuronal morphology (Kanai et al., 1989), and is the major component of paired helical filaments (PHF), unusual fibrils accumulating in a subset of neurons in Alzheimer's disease (AD) brains (Lee et al., 1991). PHF-bearing neurons are abundant in areas in which neuronal loss is found in AD. This strongly suggests that the formation of PHF is closely related to the extensive loss of selected neurons, the final consequence of AD.

Many isoforms of tau arise from a single gene by alternative splicing. The two major tau isoforms referred to here, small and big, are generated by the exclusion or inclusion of exon 4A-encoded sequence in the amino-terminal half (see Fig. 1). The so-called small tau indicates tau found primarily in the central nervous system, having apparent molecular mass of 48-67 kDa (Goedert et al., 1989), while big tau (or high-molecularweight tau) was originally detected in the peripheral nervous system (Georgieff et al., 1991;Oblinger et al., 1991) and in peripheral neuron-like cell lines (Drubin et al., 1988), with an apparent molecular mass of 110-120 kDa (Couchie et al., 1992;Goedert et al., 1992). Each isoform generates further diversity by many combinations of exclusion or inclusion of exon 2 or 3-encoded insert in the amino-terminal half (referred to as L, M, and S isoforms; see Fig. 1A), of exon 6-encoded insert in the midportion, and of exon 10-encoded repeat in the carboxyl-terminal half (referred to as 3-and 4-R tau, respectively; see Fig. 1A), rather complicated splicing which is developmentally regulated (Goedert et al., 1989;Himmler, 1989;Kosik et al., 1989). The insertion in the amino-terminal portion generates three isoforms (L, M, and S), while that in the carboxyl-terminal portion provides two isoforms (4-R and 3-R). (B) Small tau in brain and big tau in muscle. tau 1 recognizes the non-phosphorylated state at Ser-199/202 or Ser-199 (Liu et al., 1993;Szendrei et al., 1993); The numbering follows the 441-residue human tau isoform. After alkaline phosphatase treatment, the intensity of immunoreactivity increases.

tau is phosphorylated mainly at proline-directed Ser or Thr residues, and the extent of phosphorylation is also developmentally regulated; fetal tau is phosphorylated to a greater extent than adult tau (Watanabe et al., 1993). The tau composing the framework of PHF (PHF-tau) is now known to be even more phosphorylated than fetal tau. The phosphorylation of PHF-tau occurs on a number of proline-directed and non-proline-directed Ser or Thr residues, amounting to 20 residues per molecule (Morishima-Kawashima et al., 1995).

Since hyperphosphorylation is the most striking characteristic of PHF-tau, it has long been thought that elucidation of the characteristics and mechanism of hyperphosphorylation would lead us to a better understanding of the significance of PHF. In fact, phosphorylated tau has a reduced affinity for microtubules, and PHF-tau has almost none (Bramblett et al., 1993;Yoshida and Ihara, 1993). Thus, one possible scenario is that tau is hyperphosphorylated in AD brain by activated protein kinase or inactivated protein phosphatase, resulting in the destabilization of microtubules and finally their complete disassembly (see Trojanowski and Lee, 1995;Imahori and Uchida, 1997 for recent reviews). However, we were unable to detect increased levels of soluble, cytosolic PHF-tau in AD brain. Although it has been a puzzle, the difficulty in detecting such species may be explained by rapid dephosphorylation during postmortem (Matsuo et al., 1994;Garver et al., 1996). Even if cytosolic tau is hyperphosphorylated in this way in affected neurons, this alone would not lead to PHF formation because free tubulin that would have been released as a result of microtubule disassembly should act as a very strong inhibitor of tau-tau interaction; free tubulin strongly interacts with the microtubule-binding domain of tau, that is essential for the framework of PHF (Wille et al., 1992). Thus, in the above scheme one should postulate the presence of a specific molecule(s) which promotes tau-tau interaction and reduces its affinity for microtubules or tubulin (see Goedert et al., 1996).

These considerations led us to a different view: PHF formation first of all requires segregation of tau from tubulin or microtubules, and hyperphosphorylated tau must be selectively and sufficiently concentrated for effective tau-tau interaction. This assumption is consistent with the following neuropathological observations: (i) PHF-containing dendrites (neuropil threads or curly fibers) have almost no microtubules when viewed under an electron microscope (Flament-Durand and Couck, 1979;Gray et al., 1987;Paula-Barbosa et al., 1987;Metuzals et al., 1988) and (ii) hardly any tubulin or MAP2 immunoreactivity is detected in neuropil threads (Iwatsubo et al., 1992). It is likely that degenerating neurons or neuronal processes in which PHF are to be formed have already lost normal cytoskeletons including microtubules and neurofilaments (Perry et al., 1991), and even their disassembled components (Iwatsubo et al., 1992). We therefore have come to think that this kind of segregation, rather than phosphorylation, is a prerequisite for the PHF formation. Further, the aggregation of tau, but not PHF formation itself, may be an essential feature of this segregation. Possibly, if the concentrations of tau in degenerating cells or cellular processes are very high, crystal structures (PHF) are precipitated, but if they are not high enough, only amorphous deposits could be formed.

In this context, we have been concerned about inclusion body myositis (IBM), an unusual form of myopathy, and related myopathies, in which the presence of tau-immunoreactive, PHF-like fibrils has been confirmed (Askanas et al., 1994), and tau appears to be segregated from tubulin (Murakami et al., 1995a,c). IBM has long been known to be mimicked by chloroquine myopathy (CM). We sought to examine experimental CM to learn how tau dynamics is altered to cause amorphous tau deposition in CM.

tau in chloroquine myopathy

Skeletal muscles exclusi6ely express big tau

Although the expression of tau had long been considered to be restricted to neurons (Drubin et al., 1986;Goedert et al., 1988), recent studies showed that tau accumulates in muscle under certain pathological conditions, and thus suggest that tau is expressed in muscle at least at low levels (Askanas et al., 1994;Lu ¨bke et al., 1994;Murakami et al., 1995a,b). These rather unexpected findings prompted us to investigate whether tau is expressed at detectable levels in muscle and other non-neural tissues (Gu et al., 1996).

tau mRNA is widely expressed in many tissues besides the nervous system, at relatively high levels in the heart, skeletal muscle, lung, kidney, and testis, and at low levels in the adrenal gland, stomach, and liver (Gu et al., 1996). Several well-characterized antibodies to tau have also confirmed the presence of tau in various non-neural tissues (see Fig. 1B). In terms of the tau isoform expression, tissues fall into three classes: those in which small tau is predominantly expressed (brain, spinal cord, testis, and kidney), those in which big tau is predominantly expressed (skeletal muscle, and heart; see Fig. 1B), and the remainder in which both small and big tau are expressed at comparable levels.

Chloroquine myopathy

Chloroquine, an antimalarial drug, is a weak base that is taken up by cells where it is concentrated particularly well in acidic compartments such as lysosomes, which markedly swell due to the osmotic influx of water (Holtzman, 1989), causing a vacuolar myopathy. Elevation of pH to 6.0-6.5 in these organelles results in the inhibition of their acid-dependent hydrolases. Long-term administration of chloroquine to rat induces CM, which occurs preferentially in the red muscle (e.g. soleus) (MacDonald and Engel, 1970). Interestingly, in addition to tau, many AD-related molecules including amyloid i-protein, APP, ubiquitin, h1-antichymotrypsin, and ApoE were reported to deposit around and within vacuoles in affected muscle fibers (Askanas et al., 1992;Bilak et al., 1993;Murakami et al., 1995b;Tsuzuki et al., 1995). These observations raise the possibility that AD and CM may share some pathogenetic aspects, in particular the process of the deposition of these molecules.

Transient upregulation of tau mRNA in the early phase and accumulation of tau in the late phase

tau mRNA was transiently upregulated in the early phase of CM with a peak on day 28 (approximately 1.8 times that in the control), and returned to the normal level in the late phase (Fig. 2A). The levels of big tau appeared not to change significantly immediately after the chloroquine treatment, but increased remarkably in the late phase, after day 56, and thereafter somewhat decreased.

i-Amyloid protein precursor (APP), a large membrane-spanning protein, is known to be degraded in lysosomes (Golde et al., 1992;Haass et al., 1992), after very complicated intracellular trafficking (Selkoe, 1994). Chloroquine treatment of cultured cells causes intracellular accumulation of APP and its carboxyl-terminal fragments (Caporaso et al., 1992). Their lysosomal fractions contain the carboxyl-terminal fragments where APP spanned the membrane (Caporaso et al., 1992;Golde et al., 1992).

During CM, the levels of APP mRNA followed a time course very similar to that of tau mRNA: a transient increase in the early phase with a peak on day 28 ( 1.5 times), followed by continued suppression to one third of the initial level in the late phase (Fig. 2B). On the other hand, the APP levels in the muscle gradually increased with a peak on day 56 and somewhat declined thereafter (Fig. 2B). The levels of the carboxyl-terminal fragments were gradually elevated up to day 42, and increased even further later. Thus, the profiles of APP expression and accumulation were very similar to those of tau. In contrast, the mRNA and protein levels of h-tubulin (Fig. 2C) and ApoE (data not shown) took entirely different time courses in CM.

Upregulation of the mRNAs for tau and APP in the early phase did not cause significant accumulation of both proteins in the muscle. Both proteins started to accumulate on day 56 after their mRNA levels returned to normal or subnormal levels. Thus, the intracellular degradation systems for the two proteins were able to compensate for their overproduction in the early phase, but became seriously defective in the late phase, despite normal or subnormal levels of each mRNA. These findings strongly suggest that tau and APP share the same intracellular degradation system.

Accumulation of tau in rimmed 6acuoles

The soleus muscle (the most affected muscle in CM) appeared to be normal until day 28 (early phase), as judged from several histochemical stains. Some vacuolated fibers with varying diameters appeared on day 42 (late-phase) and their numbers constantly increased thereafter. On day 84, the majority of fibers were atrophic and contained numerous rimmed vacuoles showing increased acid phosphatase activity. The tau immunoreactivity, but not that of tubulin, accumulated within rimmed vacuoles in the muscle in the late phase (Fig. 3). On immunoelectron microscopy, there were a large number of autophagic vacuoles containing tauimmunoreactive amorphous materials in vacuolated fibers (Murakami et al., 1998).

From a morphological point of view, lysosomes are found only rarely in the muscle (MacDonald and Engel, 1970). However, rimmed vacuoles in CM are known to contain lysosomal enzymes including acid phosphatase, and cathepsins B, H, and D. In addition, the rimmed vacuoles in CM contained APP, especially its carboxyl-terminal fragments (Murakami et al., 1995b) which are shown to be tightly associated with lysosomes in senile plaque neurites (Kawai et al., 1992). These observations indicate that, although morphologically rare, there are lysosomes or their functional equivalents in the muscle, which are the origin of rimmed vacuoles in CM.

Degradation of cytosolic protein in lysosomes

Although most cytosolic proteins are considered to be degraded by cytosolic proteases including calpains and proteasome, several lines of evidence indicate that some cytosolic proteins, including RNase A, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), and Fos, are selectively degraded in lysosomes (Aniento et al., 1993(Aniento et al., , 1996;;Cuervo et al., 1994). LAMP 2, a heavily glycosylated lysosomal membrane protein, has recently been identified as a receptor for RNase A and GAPDH (Cuervo and Dice, 1996). Their binding to the receptor (Chiang and Dice, 1988;Chiang et al., 1989;Terlecky et al., 1992) and subsequent degradation (Agarraberes et al., 1997) is modulated by heat shock cognate protein (hsc73).

Recently, it has been found that there are two populations of rat liver lysosomes, distinguished by the presence or absence of hsc73 within the lysosomal lumen (Cuervo et al., 1997). The lysosomal fraction containing hsc73 exhibits much higher efficiencies in the in vitro uptake and degradation of GAPDH and RNase A. In this context, it is noteworthy that hsc73 is associated with neurofibrillary tangles (Hamos et al., 1991), and also accumulates within rimmed vacuoles in Fig. 2. Illustrated temporal profiles for tau and its mRNA (A), APP, its mRNA, and its carboxyl fragments (B), and a tubulin and its mRNA (C). Fig. 3. Rimmed vacuole containing tau. Tibialis anterior muscle was excised from rats treated with chloroquine (day 84) and immunostained for tau (the tibialis anterior is much less affected than the soleus). (Left) A cross section stained with hematoxylin and eosin. There are fibers of various sizes, characteristic of myopathy. A muscle fiber in the center has a large rimmed vacuole. (Middle) The vacuole in the adjacent section is labeled with tau 1. (Right) After alkaline phosphatase treatment the intensity of immunoreactivity increases, especially in the subsarcolemmal area. Original magnification, × 250.

CM (Murakami et al., unpublished observations). In addition, GAPDH is also localized to rimmed vacuoles in CM (Murakami et al., unpublished observations).

The lysosomal degradation of cytosolic protein should consist of three steps (Fig. 4): binding of a particular cytosolic protein to its lysosomal receptor(s), entry into the luminal space, degradation by lysosomal proteases and release of degraded products to the cytosol. Thus, depending on the lesion site, a particular cytosolic protein may accumulate in the cytosol or in the lysosomes. It seems likely that in CM, step 1 is normal, but step 3, intralysosomal protein degradation, is defective, causing tau accumulation within rimmed vacuoles, the lysosomal equivalents in the muscle.

Tau and lysosomes in the AD brain -a speculation

Granulovacuolar bodies (GVB) in AD brain show a striking similarity to rimmed vacuoles in terms of morphology and immunoreactivity. GVB are confined to the cytoplasm of pyramidal cells in the hippocampus where several vacuoles, 3-5 vm in diameter, containing central granules are found (Ball and Lo, 1977). Occasionally, GVB coexist with neurofibrillary tangles in the same neuron. Electron microscopy showed that each consists of a membrane-bound vacuole containing a highly osmiophilic granular core, suggesting a lysosomal origin (Hirano et al., 1968). A subpopulation of GVB are immunoreactive for ubiquitin and phosphorylated tau (Mena et al., 1992;Dickson et al., 1993;Ikegami et al., 1996). It is tempting to speculate that a very restricted population of pyramidal cells in the hippocampus (Ball and Lo, 1977) can incorporate PHF-tau into their lysosomes and attempt to digest it. Steps 1-3 are binding of tau to a receptor on lysosomal membrane, entry of tau into the luminal space, and digestion of tau, respectively. In CM step 3 is blocked.

This may explain why GVB-bearing neurons often lack tangles because the lysosomal function should be maintained in these neurons (see below).

Beside this, there is substantial evidence suggesting that lysosomes are defective in AD brain. First, in those neurons to be lost during AD (pyramidal neurons in layers 3 and 5 of the association cortex), the number of cathepsin D-positive lysosomes greatly increases and their intracellular distribution is altered (Cataldo et al., 1995). Second, the level of cathepsin D mRNA is significantly elevated in those at-risk neurons (Cataldo et al., 1995). Third, lysosomal active proteases and hydrolases are demonstrable in senile plaques, suggesting that they are released from degenerating neurons (Cataldo et al., 1991).

On the other hand, the assumption that tau is degraded in lysosomes is consistent with the previous observation of build-up of tau immunoreactivities in Purkinje cell dendrites after intrathecal leupeptin administration to young rats (Ivy et al., 1989). Intrathecal leupeptin administration is a reliable procedure for creating lipofuscin-like granules in young rats and this rat model provides substantial evidence that lipofuscin is the consequence of defective lysosomal protein degradation.

Taking all the results into consideration, lysosomal dysfunction in AD brain may offer a novel explanation as to why only hyperphosphorylated species of tau is found in PHF and how PHF are formed in affected dendrites. In this lysosomal pathway of proteolysis, cytosolic proteins are translocated through the lysosomal membrane, assisted by cytosolic and lysosomal molecular chaperones (Agarraberes et al., 1997) and a receptor protein in the lysosomal membrane. Importantly, the activity of this pathway appears to significantly decrease with age (Cuervo and Dice, 1998). The extent of phosphorylation of tau may be involved in the efficiency of this lysosomal pathway, especially in the affinity for its receptor and/or translocation though the membrane. While normal tau could be efficiently incorporated and digested, the hyperphosphorylated cytosolic tau (cytosolic PHF-tau) may no longer be incorporated into somehow defective lysosomes in degenerating neurons or neuronal processes where normal cytoskeletons are lost. Thus, hyperphosphorylation and/or lysosomal dysfunction would contribute to the accumulation of PHF-tau. While the majority of cytosolic proteins are degraded by cytosolic proteases, only tau could form aggregates and acquire protease resistance. Thus, PHF formation would reflect particular dysfunction of the lysosomal degradation pathway for cytosolic proteins, and therefore may represent the consequence rather than the cause of neuronal degeneration.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported in part by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Priority Areas (No. 07264210) and Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research (Nos. 07408025, 08838006 and 09835003) from the Ministry of Education, Science and Culture, by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Health and Welfare, and by grants from the Takeda Science Foundation, the Smoking Research Foundation, and the Kato Memorial Trust for Nambyo Research. We thank M. Anzai for typing the manuscript.

Note added in proof

The following report is added for reference. Murakami, N., Oyama, F., Gu 

Fig. 1 .1Fig. 1. (A)Exon structure of tau mRNA. Exons 2, 3, 4A, 6, and 10 are alternatively spliced. The insertion in the amino-terminal portion generates three isoforms (L, M, and S), while that in the carboxyl-terminal portion provides two isoforms (4-R and 3-R). (B) Small tau in brain and big tau in muscle. tau 1 recognizes the non-phosphorylated state at Ser-199/202 or Ser-199(Liu et al., 1993;Szendrei et al., 1993); The numbering follows the 441-residue human tau isoform. After alkaline phosphatase treatment, the intensity of immunoreactivity increases.

Fig. 4 .4Fig. 4. Schematic illustration for the lysosomal degradation of tau.Steps 1-3 are binding of tau to a receptor on lysosomal membrane, entry of tau into the luminal space, and digestion of tau, respectively. In CM step 3 is blocked.

