Autosomal dominant myopathy with congenital joint contractures, ophthalmoplegia, and rimmed vacuoles

We describe a new myopathy in a large family with 19 affected cases. Inheritance was autosomal dominant. Characteristic clinical features were congenital joint contractures, which normalized during early childhood, external ophthalmoplegia, and proximal muscle weakness. Muscle atrophy was most prominent in the pectoralis and quadriceps muscles.

The clinical course was nonprogressive in childhood, but most adult cases experienced deterioration of muscle function, starting from 30 to 50 years of age. The major histopathological change of skeletal muscle in childhood was focal disorganization of myofilaments. In adults with progressive muscle weakness, the muscle biopsies showed dystrophic changes and rimmed vacuoles with cytoplasmic and intranuclear inclusions of 15-to 21-nm filaments. These findings suggests that this new disease should be classified as a variant of hereditary inclusion body myopathy.

Patients and Methods

The index case was referred because of suspected congenital myopathy. Her mother and maternal grandfather were also affected. An extended family investigation was performed, applying a standardized clinical examination form. A total of 39 relatives were examined, and detailed neuromuscular investigations were performed in 10. A questionnaire comprising 102 items was later filled out by each examined family member. Obstetrical, pediatric, child health clinic, and other From the Departments of *Pediatrics, tClinical Genetics, and $Pathology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Goteborg, Sweden.

Family members were classified as definitely affected if they had symptoms and clinical signs of myopathy on examination in addition to external ophthalmoplegia. They were considered as not affected if they had no definite symptoms and normal muscle findings on clinical examination. Cases that did not fulfil these criteria were considered as probably affected.

Investigations included electrocardiography (n = 6) and echocardiography (n = 4), computed tomography (n = 2), or magnetic resonance imaging (n = 1) of the brain and ophthalmological examinations (n = 3). Electromyography (EMG; n = 8), single-fiber EMG (n = 2), nerve conduction velocities (n = 7), repetitive nerve stimulation (n = 2), and edrophonium test (n = 2 ) were also performed. Biochemical analyses included serum creatine kinase (S-CK), serum aspartate aminotransferase, serum alanine aminotransferase, serum lactate dehydrogenase, serum vitamin B,, and folic acid, serum electrophoresis, serum electrolytes, serum carnitine, serum selenium, serum thyroid hormones, serum acetylcholine receptor antibodies, blood sedimentation rate, blood lactate, urine organic acids including lactate, urine myoglobin, and muscle carnitine.

Muscle biopsy for ultrastructural and enzyme histochemical analysis was performed in 9 patients as previously de- some of the cases, to examine the expression of dystrophin, aand y-sarcoglycan, merosin (NLC-DYS 1, NLC-DYS2, NLC-DYS3, NLC-SODAG, NLC-35DAG, NLC-merosin, Novocastra Laboratories, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK), ubiquitin, and M H C class I (ubiquitin, DAKO-HLA-ABC; Dakopatts, Glostrup, Denmark), using the avidin-biotin complex (ABC) method with peroxidase and diaminobenzidine as chromogen. Immunoreactivity of the SMI-3 1 antibody (Lot 11; Sternberger Monoclonals, Baltimore, MD) was studied on frozen sections. This is a an anti-neurofilament antibody, which cross-reacts with phosphorylated tau and stains neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer's dementia and filamentous inclusions in inclusion body myositis.' The protocol was a slight modification of the method described by Askanas and co-workers.' The sections were fixed in acetone and the immunoreactive material was visualized by the ABC method as described above. DNA isolation, polymerase chain reaction reactions, and analyses of data were performed essentially as described earlier. Two-point linkage analyses were performed with the MLINK program from the Linkage version 5.1 package. The model used for analyses was autosomal dominant inheritance with full penetrance (1.0) and a disease allele frequency of 0.0001. A possible candidate gene region was analyzed by using the chromosome 9 markers GATA 62F03 (not available, unassigned), GATA 27A11 (Human Genome Mapping locus: D9S925), GATA 7D12 (D!3S301), GATA 21F05 (D9S922), GGAA 22E01 (D9S938), GATA 64G07 (D9S934), and AFM073ybll (D9S158). Primer pairs and linkage maps were derived from the CHLC (Cooperative Human Linkage Consortium'*) and from G e n e t h ~n . ' ~ 

Results

Pedigree Analysis

Subject I:2 had thin shoulders, his sister had stiff joints and a limping gait, and their father and grandfather      

Course

In childhood, the condition was nonprogressive. Joint contractures resolved during infancy and early childhood. From 30 to 50 years of age, most patients experienced deterioration with limitation of ambulation. Three of these patients developed severe atrophy of the thigh muscles in a few years' time. Two of the affected adults needed a walking stick and 1 had to use a walking frame.

Laborato y Investigations

Biochemical investigations were normal except for S-CK, which showed a 2to 10-fold increase in 4 of  2.

Among the studied cases, the 3 oldest patients showed the most pronounced pathological changes. In these cases, there was a considerable increase of the interstitial connective tissue, and the muscle fibers showed marked caliber variation and frequent central nuclei. Necrotic fibers were not found, but there were signs of regeneration. Rimmed vacuoles with SMI-3 1-positive inclusions were present in these 3 cases (Fig 3a, b, and   c), but not in the younger, less affected individuals. Rimmed vacuoles were very frequent in 1 of the patients, where they were found in clusters of muscle fibers. Ubiquitin immunoreactivity was frequently associated with the rimmed vacuoles. Cytoplasmic inclusions consisting of filaments measuring 15 to 21 nm were present in all 3 of these cases (see Fig 3d and f ) , but intranuclear filaments were found only in Subject III:15 (see Fig 3e). Congophilic depositions were ob-served in association with rimmed vacuoles in Subject 111:15, but were not frequent. Muscle fibers with cytochrome c oxidase deficiency were present at low frequency (range, 0.5-1%) in all 3 cases with rimmed vacuoles and ultrastructural changes of mitochondria with paracrystalline inclusions were also found. Two minor lymphocyte inflammatory cell infiltrates were seen in one biopsy of subject 111:15, but MHC-I expression was not increased in the muscle fibers. There was no deficiency of dystrophin, sarcoglycans, or merosin. Disorganization of myofilaments in a minicore fashion was observed both in young and adult cases.

The muscle biopsy of Subject III:5 showed tubular aggregates in many type 2 fibers, and slightly increased variation in muscle fiber size.

Discussion

Clinical, laboratory, and morphological features indicated an early-onset myopathy with progressive course in adulthood. Congenital myopathies are usually characterized by early hypotonus, muscle weakness, and delayed motor milestones and follow a relatively nonprogressive course. l 4 This family showed early onset, but early hypotonus and delayed motor milestones were not prominent findings. Most affected family members experienced deterioration of muscle function with onset in middle adulthood. The progressive course was supported by elevated S-CK and dystrophic changes of muscles with signs of muscle-fiber regeneration and increased interstitial connective tissue. These changes were more pronounced in adults compared with children. There were some resemblances in childhood to multi-minicore disease both clinically and morphologically.' Autosomal dominant inheritance has been described in some families with multi-minicore disease, but ophthalmoplegia and joint contractures were not reported in these families. "-I8

In addition, minicores are unspecific and similar lesions can be observed in other conditions such as in muscular dystrophies, and in inflammatory and endocrine myopathies.' ' External ophthalmoplegia, which probably was progressive, was a characteristic finding in our family. Although cytochrome c oxidase-deficient muscle fibers were present in adult cases in our family, mitochondria1 myopathy was not a characteristic finding as in autosomal dominant progressive external ophthalmoplegia with multiple mitochondria1 DNA deletions."

Hereditary progressive myopathies histologically characterized by rimmed vacuoles in muscle fibers and inclusions consisting of filaments with a diameter of 15 to 21 nm form a heterogenous group of diseases, designated as familial or hereditary inclusion body myopathies (h-IBMs). They show morphological similarities with the sporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM). 536

Autosomal recessive inheritance has been described in a quadriceps-sparing h-IBM with onset in early adulthood, mainly affecting Persian Jews.20 This disorder has been linked to chromosome 9p-q1.21222 We performed linkage analysis to this gene locus, but no indications of linkage could be detected for any of the markers used. In a Tunisian kindred with quadricepssparing h-IBM23 and also in a proximal myopathy with autosomal recessive or X-linked recessive i n h e r i t a n ~e , ~~ a symptomatic leukoencephalopathy was an additional finding. Autosomal dominant inheritance with limbgirdle muscle weakness has also been described in h-IBM25-27 but the age of onset was later, and neither congenital joint contractures, nor ophthalmoplegia were reported in these patients. Similar histopathological changes are also seen in late-onset distal myopathies such as Welander's distal myopathy2' with auto-soma1 dominant inheritance, and distal myopathy with rimmed vacuoles and autosomal recessive inheritan~e.~' Distal myopathy with rimmed vacuoles and autosomal recessive inheritance has recently been linked to chromosome 9 and is possibly allelic to quadriceps sparing h-IBM.30 Rimmed vacuoles and tubulofilaments have also been described in oculopharyngeal muscular dys-trophy3' and a childhood-onset variant has been reported that might constitute a separate entity.32 s-IBM is a disorder with insidious onset of slowly progressive proximal and distal muscle weakness of late adulthood and is the most common muscle disorder presenting in patients older than 50 years of age. Extraoculat muscles are generally not involved. Characteristic histopathological changes are muscle fibers with rimmed vacuoles, and 15to 21-nm filamentous inclusions, in addition to inflammatory cell infiltration with invasion of nonnecrotic muscle fibers by T Congophilic inclusions, accumulation of P-amyloid, P-amyloid precursor protein, ubiquitin, apolipoprotein E, prion protein, and a,-antichymotrypsin have been identified in muscle fibers in s-IBM.~.'.~* Inclusions in s-IBM show immunoreactivity with the SMI-31 antibody, which is an anti-neurofilament antibody also reacting with hyperphosphorylated tau. 35 In our family, ultrastructural examination showed, in several adult cases, the characteristic inclusions of s-IBM and h-IBM. Accumulations of ubiquitin and occasional congophilic inclusions were present in muscle fibers and we also demonstrated immunoreactivity with the SMI-31 antibody. These findings suggest that our family may be regarded as a variant of h-IBM.

Case III:5 was treated with steroids because of sarcoidosis, and his daughter, Case IV7, had celiac disease. Both had proximal muscle weakness and atrophy but lacked joint contractures at birth and ophthalmoplegia on clinical examination. Muscle biopsy of Case III:5 showed tubular aggregates in type 2 fibers, whereas no morphological changes were found in Case IV:7. It is still uncertain whether they are afflicted by the same disease as the rest of the family, and we have chosen to consider them as probably affected. We conclude that this familial disorder may be regarded a new variant of h-IBM. This family supports the existence of different hereditary inclusion body myopathy syndromes with distinct clinical features and chromosomal locations. Further linkage studies and identification of the gene and gene product, responsible for the phenotype in this family, will be important for understanding the molecular background and the pathogenesis of h-IBM and s-IBM.

This study was supported by grants from the Swedish Medical Research Council, project no. 07122, Linnea and Josef Carlssons Foundation, Petter Silfversluolds Memorial Foundation, Goteborg Pediatric Clinics Research Fundation, Goteborg Medical Association, King Gustav V 80 years Anniversary Fund, and the Swedish Rheumatism Association.

We thank Dr Alena Novak and Dr P e r -h e Grahn at the Child Habilitation Centre of Mariedal in Vanersborg, Sweden, for support and assistance, and Birgitta Hallberg for technical assistance in the genetic study.

Not present; + = present; D = decreased; N = normal; I = increased; NIA = historian unavailable.

Fig 2 .2Fig 2. (A) Winging of scapulae, hyperlordosic, extended knees, and thin thiKhs in a 6-year old boy (Case IV25). (B) Severe atrophy of the thigh muscles in a 37-year-old man (Case IrI: 15, the fnther of Case IV25).

Fig 3 .3Fig 3. (a and b) Serial sections of muscle tissue from Case IL7. (a) Staining with hematoxylin-eosin shows several rimmed vacu-1 oles. (b) Immunohistochemical staining with the SMI-31 antibody shows several immunoreactive inclusions. (c) Muscle tissue from Case III:l5 showing increased interstitial connective tissue and multiple fibers with rimmed vacuoles (arrows). (d) Collections of cytoplasmic filaments in Case IL7. (e) Intranuclear filaments in Case III:l5. (f) Detail offilamentous inclusions. The jhments appear with longitudinal periodicity (lefi) and as tubular structures (right).

Table 1 .1The joint involvement included the fingers in 6, the hips in 3, the fingers and hips in 1, and was generalized in 4 cases. Congenital hip dislocation was observed in 4 children and 2 of them developed acetab-Both in children and in adults the muscle weakness and atrophy predominantly affected the shoulder and pelvic girdles with atrophy of pectoralis major and quadriceps femoris muscles (Fig 2). A mild muscle involvement of the face and hands was also noticed. External ophthalmoplegia was a characteristic finding. It ranged from slight upward gaze palsy in the small af-Darin et al: h-IBM with Congenital Joint Contractures 243 15318249, 1998, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ana.410440215 by University Of Illinois At Urbana Champaign, Wiley Online Library on [10/03/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License Clinical Findings in 19 Relatives with De$nite Myopathy11: 411. 511: 611: 7ular dysplasia, and they later underwent surgery. There were no other signs of joint malformations o n x-ray films. Other symptoms in the newborn period were feeding difficulties with poor sucking in 2 children.Despite limb-girdle weakness and muscular atrophy, generalized floppiness of infants and children was not found. Onset of walking was delayed in 1 subject who began to walk unassisted at 1.5 years of age. Four children had delayed early speech development and said their first words after 1.5 years of age.

Table 2 .2Muscle Biopsy Findings in Six Definite& Affected Fami& Members Not present; + = present; ND = not determined; NI = not identified.IV:29IV:25III:17111: 15III:3II:7-=EMG showed myopathic changes, with short duration, polyphasia, and low amplitude to a variable degree. The changes were more pronounced in proximal than in distal muscles in 5 of the 6 definitely affected cases. One had only minor changes with polyphasia (Case III:17). The insertion activity was normal in all, and there were no signs of spontaneous denervation. Sensory and motor nerve conduction velocities were normal in all. In the 2 probably affected cases, electrophysiological investigations were normal in 1 (Case III:5) and EMG showed slightly increased polyphasia in the right deltoid muscle of 1 (Case IV:7). Investigations for myasthenia, performed in Subjects III:5 and III:15 with single-fiber EMG and repetitive nerve stimulation, were normal.Linkage analysis was performed for a candidate gene region on chromosome 9, using polymorphic markers.No indications of linkage was detected (data not shown but available on request). The results of the morphological analysis of the muscle biopsy specimens are summarized in Table

