

Inclusion body myositis in twins

Article abstracGSporadic inclusion body myositis (s-IBM) is characterized by late onset of slowly progressive weakness that involves the quadriceps and volar forearm muscles early in the course of the disease. There are hereditary forms of inclusion body myopathy (h-IBM) that histologically resemble s-IBM. The lack of inflammation on biopsy and the different ages at onset and patterns of muscle weakness distinguish s-IBM from h-IBM. We report twin brothers with the typical clinical and histologic features of s-IBM. The occurrence of s-IBM in these twins suggests the possibility of a genetic susceptibility to developing s-IBM.

Inclusion body myositis (IBM) is characterized by the insidious onset of slowly progressive proximal and distal weakness, which generally develops after the age of 50 year^.^-^ Males are affected more commonly than females. The clinical hallmark of IBM is early weakness and atrophy of the quadriceps and volar forearm muscles (wrist and finger flexors). Muscle histology demonstrates fibers with one or more rimmed vacuoles, eosinophilic inclusions, endomysial inflammation with invasion of non-necrotic muscle fibers, and amyloid deposition on Congo red staining; electron microscopy (EM) shows the accumulation of 15-to 21-nm tubulofilaments. IBM typically occurs sporadically (s-IBM), although there are hereditary forms of inclusion body myopathy (h-IBM).3-8 There are autosomal dominant (AD) and recessive (AR) forms of h-IBM that histologically resemble s-IBM except for the usual absence of inflammation. The age at onset and pattern of weakness in h-IBM are also different than s-IBM. Most patients with s-IBM present over the age of 50 years with prominent quadriceps and volar forearm weakness. In contrast, most h-IBM patients present earlier in adult life and have a distinctly different pattern of weakness. Patients with AR h-IBM usually present with distal lower extremity weakness (foot drop) and have relative sparing of the quadriceps even when more proximal muscles are involved. Although the pattern of weakness is variable in AD h-IBM, patients have more of a limb-girdle distribution of muscle involve-Case 1. A 63-year-old man presented with a 1-year history of progressive weakness in both lower extremities. He described difficulty arising from chairs and climbing steps as well as occasionally tripping and falling down. He denied any significant weakness in his upper extremities and bulbar muscles or sensory loss. His medical history was remarkable only for gout and his only medication was allopurinal. Family history was remarkable for a twin brother with similar symptoms of weakness (see Case 2). The brother appeared to be an identical twin, although monozygoticity was never established by DNA analysis. There was no other family history of neuromuscular disorders or history of consanguinity.

Examination was remarkable for significant atrophy of the quadriceps and volar forearms bilaterally. The following Medical Research Council (MRC) muscle grades were noted: neck flexors 4+, neck extensors 5, shoulder abductors 5 , elbow flexors 5 -on the right and 4+ on the left, elbow extensors 5 on the right and 5on the left, wrist flexors 4+ on the right and 4 on the left, wrist extensors 5 , finger flexors 4, finger extensors 4+ on the right and 4 on the left, hip flexors/abductors/extensors 4, knee flexors 5 , knee extensors 4-, ankle dorsiflexors 4+, and ankle plantar flexors 5. He had decreased light touch, pinprick, and vibratory sensation to the mid-shins. Muscle stretch reflexes were 1+ throughout and plantar responses were flexor.

Serum creatine kinase (CK) was slightly elevated at 491 IU/L (normal <220 IU/L). Nerve conduction studies (NCS)

Figure. Muscle biopsy shows endomysial inflammation and invasion of a non-necrotic muscle fiber (A). B reveals a muscle fiber with numerous subsarcolemmal rimmed vacuoles and adjacent narrow angular fibers. Modified Gomori-Trichrome, X667.

demonstrated normal sural, median, and ulnar sensory nerve action potentials and peroneal, median, and ulnar compound muscle action potentials. Electromyography (EMG) revealed fibrillation potentials, a mixture of short and long duration polyphasic motor unit potentials, and early recruitment in proximal and distal muscles of the right upper and lower extremities. A left biceps muscle revealed prominent endomysial mononuclear inflammatory infiltrate with invasion of non-necrotic muscle fibers (figure , A). There were many fibers with one or more rimmed vacuoles (figure , B). Congo red stain showed deposition of amyloidogenic material in many vacuolated fibers, and 18-nm tubulofilaments typical of IBM were detected on EM.

Case 2. This patient is the 63-year-old twin brother of the first patient. He had a 3-year history of proximal lower extremity weakness and more recent involvement of his upper extremities. The patient described mild sensory loss in his hands and feet. Medical history was remarkable for alcohol abuse.

Physical examination revealed significant atrophy of his quadriceps and volar forearms as well as the characteristic IBM pattern of weakness with prominent involvement of the quadriceps, wrist flexors, and finger flexors. Light touch, pinprick, and vibratory sensation were diminished below the knees and mid-forearms. Muscle stretch reflexes were absent a t the ankles; otherwise, were grade 2 at the biceps, triceps, brachioradialis, and knees. Plantar responses were flexor. NCS were normal. EMG revealed fibrillation potentials, positive sharp waves, complex repetitive discharges, and small duration, polyphasic motor unit potentials that recruited early in the proximal and distal extremities. Biopsy of the left triceps revealed endomysial inflammatory cell infiltrate with invasion of nonnecrotic muscle fibers. Many fibers with rimmed vacuoles and eosinophilic inclusions were evident.

Discussion. This represents the first report of twins with a-IBM. We cannot state with certainty that the twins were monozygotic because they never had DNA analysis. Nevertheless, they appeared identical throughout their lives. We believe our patients represent a familial occurrence of s-IBM rather than h-IBM. There are distinct histologic and clinical differences between s-IBM and h-IBM that are helpful in distinguishing these disorders. S-IBM and h-IBM are similar in that muscle biopsies show rimmed vacuoles and an abnormal accumulation of Alzheimer-characteristic proteins (i.e., p-amyloid protein, epitopes of P-amyloid precursor protein, hyperphosphorylated tau, a-1 antichymotrypsin, apolipoprotein E, and u b i q ~i t i

n ) . ~, ~

There is a paucity of and some epitopes of phosphorylated tau as well as a different expression of apolipoprotein E in h-IBM compared with s-IBM.~,~ Congophilic muscle fibers were abundant in our patients. More importantly, in contrast to s-IBM, muscle biopsies in h-IBM are not associated with significant i n f l a m m a t i ~n . ~, ~, ~ Our patients had prominent endomysial inflammation, consisting mainly of CD8+, cytotoxic T cells, and macrophages, which invaded non-necrotic muscle fibers-typical of s-IBM.

The onset of symptoms in the brothers began after the age of 50 years, also a characteristic feature of s-IBM.~-~ In contrast, patients with h-IBM generally present much earlier in life, usually in the second or third d e ~a d e . ~-~

The pattern of weakness is also quite different between s-IBM and the various h-IBMs. The pattern of weakness in our twin brothers was characteristic of sporadic IBM with severe and early quadriceps and volar forearm ~e a k n e s s . l -~

The auto-soma1 recessive form of h-IBM, which maps to the same general area as Nonaka distal myopathy, begins with weakness in the anterior compartment of the distal lower extremities (i.e., foot drop) and typically spares the quadriceps even when proximal muscles become inv01ved.~-~ AD forms of h-IBM are much less common than the recessive forms. In our experience, AD h-IBM patients usually have a limb girdle pattern of weakness, although the pattern of weakness can be variable.6

The pathogenic basis of s-IBM is not known. The prominent inflammation suggests that the myopathy could be an autoimmune disorder; the lack of response to immunosuppressive agents and the accu-mulation of Alzheimer-like proteins implies the possibility of a primary degenerative disorder of muscle. There could be a genetic susceptibility to developing s-IBM, regardless of whether the pathogenesis is degenerative or autoimmune. For example, there is an increased risk of Alzheimer's disease within families with an affected member. Likewise, there is an increase incidence of autoimmune diseases within families who have other members affected with autoimmune disorders. Of note, there are a few reports of polymyositis and dermatomyositis occurring in parents and children and in siblings, including identical twins.g Recently, Sivakumar et al. reported seven patients from three distinct kinships (no twins) who had the characteristic clinical phenotype and histologic appearance of s-IBM, similar to our twin brothers.1° All seven patients had the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) DR3 phenotype (DRB1*0301/0302), which has an increased incidence in s-IBM. Unfortunately, we were unable to obtain HLA phenotyping on our patients. One could speculate on the possibility of viral infection or other environmental factors triggering the development of s-IBM in genetically susceptible individuals. Being twins, our patients could have had similar early environmental exposures. Neither environmental factors nor genetic predisposition alone explain the development of s-IBM; otherwise, there would likely be more familial cases of s-IBM. Of course, s-IBM could have occurred in our brothers by chance. More studies regarding the pathogenesis of s-IBM and the possible role of genetic predisposition are necessary.

Amyloid neuropathy simulating lower motor neuron disease

Article abstract-We report a 57-year-old man with progressive symmetric weakness and fasciculation affecting the legs. Electromyography revealed fibrillations and neurogenic motor unit potentials in the leg muscles. Biopsy of a motor branch of the obturator nerve revealed axonal degeneration, loss of myelinated nerve fibers, and amyloidosis with deposits of lambda light chains. At 6-month follow-up, the patient manifested sensory and autonomic symptoms, and lambda light chains were first detected in the serum. 

