Immunolocalization of transcription factor NF-kB in inclusion-body myositis muscle and at normal human neuromuscular junctions

To investigate whether nuclear factor kB (NF-kB) is involved in the pathogenesis of inclusion-body myositis (IBM), we immunostained muscle biopsies of eight patients with IBM with specific antibodies against its p50 and p65 subunits. Approximately 70% of IBM vacuolated muscle fibers had strong focal accumulations of both NF-kB p50 and p65, which by immunoelectronmicroscopy, localized mainly to clusters of paired-helical filaments (PHFs). Virtually all necrotic fibers, in various muscle biopsies, had diffusely strong p50 immunoreactivity, whereas p65 immunoreactivity was present only in a small subset of necrotic fibers. At all neuromuscular junctions, postsynaptically there was strong p65 but no p50 immunoreactivity. Our data suggest that NF-kB plays a role in IBM pathogenesis. Different distributions of NF-kB subunits in necrotic fibers and at normal neuromuscular junctions (NMJs) suggests different roles of each subunit in human muscle pathology and physiology.

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (IBM) is the most common, progressive muscle disease occuring in patients over the age of 50 years. It is of unknown etiology and pathogenesis. Diagnostic features of IBM muscle biopsies are vacuolated muscle fibers (VMFs), various degree of lymphocytic inflammation, congo-red positivity within the VMFs, and 15-21 nm paired helical filaments (PHFs) containing phosphorylated tau (reviewed in [1,2]). An intriguing feature of the IBM-abnormal muscle fibers is accumulation within them of b-amyloid precursor protein (bAPP) epitopes, including b-amyloid protein (Ab), and of several other 'Alzheimer-characteristic' proteins [1,2,4].

Oxidative stress, in association with muscle aging, has recently been postulated to be an important component of IBM pathogenesis [3]. Indicators of oxidative stress in IBM include accumulation within IBM-VMFs of: (1) copper-zinc superoxide dismutase and its mRNA [6]; (2) neuronal-and inducible-nitric oxide syntheses, and nitrotyrosine [22]; and (3) malondialdehyde, an indicator of lipid peroxidation [10]. Interleukins 1b (IL-1b) and IL-6 are also accumulated in IBM-VMFs [13].

NF-kB is an inducible, dimeric transcription factor consisting of two DNA binding subunits, p50 and p65 (reviewed in [7,8,18]). In unstimulated cells, cytoplasmic NF-kB is bound to IkB, which prevents NF-kB from entering the nuclei. When cells are stimulated, specific kinases phosphorylate IKB, causing its rapid degradation and release of NF-KB. Subsequently, NF-KB moves into the nucleus, where it binds to specific sequences in the enhancer/promoter regions of target genes, increasing transcription of various genes involved in several normal and pathologic conditions [7,18]. Factors considered to activate NF-kB include cytokines, Ab, viruses, endotoxins, and other activators of protein kinase C. Their mechanism of activating NF-kB was proposed to be through induction of reactive oxygen intermediates [7,8,18]. To evaluate whether NF-kB participates in IBM pathogenesis, we immunostained, according to our techniques [4,5,17,22], 10 mm transverse sections of freshly-frozen diagnostic muscle biopsies obtained with informed consent from eight IBM patients. Twenty-two controls included three polymyositis, two dermatomyositis, three Duchenne muscular dystrophy, three morphologically non-specific myopathy, three amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and eight normal muscle biopsies. Diagnosis was based on clinical and laboratory studies, including 18-reaction histochemistry of the muscle biopsy [11]. All the IBM biopsies had the characteristic diagnostic features, including VMFs, congophilia, SMI-31-immunoreactivity, and PHFs by EM [1,2,5].

The antibodies were: (1) rabbit polyclonal antiserum against a peptide corresponding to amino acids 531-550 within the C-terminal region of human NF-kB p65 (lot C226; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA), diluted 1:50); (2) rabbit polyclonal antiserum against a peptide mapping within a domain encompassing part of the basic NLS sequence and the N-terminal adjacent 11 amino acids of the p105 precursor of human NF-kB p50 (lot C116; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), diluted 1:50; (3) mouse monoclonal antibody selectively recognizing an epitope of p65 only when IkBa is not bound to it, i.e. 'active-form-p65' [15] (Boehringer Mannheim Corporation, Indianapolis, IN), diluted 1:20. All primary incubations were at 4°C for 48 h. Controls for staining specificity were: (1) omission of the primary antibody, and (2) preabsorption of primary polyclonal antibodies with their corresponding peptides (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) as described [4,17,22]. To block non-specific binding of antibody to Fc receptors, sections were preincubated with 1:10 diluted normal goat serum [4,5,17,22].

Double immunofluorescence utilized polyclonal antiserum against p50 or p65, combined with a monoclonal antibody SMI-31 (Sternberger Monoclonals Incorporated, Baltimore, MD) that recognizes IBM-PHFs [5,17], diluted 1:400. Respective secondary antisera were labeled with Texas-red and Cy2 [17,22].

Immunoelectronmicroscopy (immuno-EM) was performed on 10 mm unfixed frozen sections adhered to the bottom of 35-mm Petri dishes [4,5,17,22].

By light-microscopy, approximately 70-80% of IBM vacuolated muscle fibers (VMFs) had strongly-immunoreactive squiggly, linear, or plaque-like inclusions with antibodies against p50 and p65 (Fig. 1). Approximately 20-30% of vacuolated fibers had similar immunoreactivity with the antibody against active-form-p65 (Fig. 1). In squiggly and linear inclusions p50 and p65 colocalized with SMI-31 (Fig. 1). By immuno-EM, p50 and p65 immunolocalized mainly to paired-helical filaments, which appeared as tubulofilaments on immunoperoxidase staining (Fig. 2).

Virtually all necrotic muscle fibers, in IBM and other myopathies, had very strong and diffuse p50 immunoreactivity (Fig. 3); p65 immunoreactivity was present only in approximately 20% of the necrotic fibers. Double-labeling showed that in the necrotic fibers, p50 and p65 immunoreactivities did not colocalize with immunoreactivity of the macrophage marker Ber-Mac 3 (Dako, Carpenteria, CA).

Neither in IBM VMFs nor in necrotic muscle fibers of various diseases, could we detect NF-kB in the nuclei.

In all biopsies, p65-immunoreactivity was present at the postsynaptic domain of the neuromuscular junctions (NMJs), where it colocalized with bound a-bungarotoxin (Fig. 3). However, active-form-p65 and p50 did not immunolocalize at the NMJs.

Either omitting the primary antiserum or preabsorption of antisera against p50 and p65 with their corresponding peptides respectively eliminated and markedly diminished the staining. None of the control muscle biopsies had NF-kBimmunoreactive inclusions characteristic of those of IBM vacuolated fibers.

Our studies demonstrate for the first time that NF-kB participates in pathologic processes affecting human skeletal muscle. The cause and effect of NF-kB increase in IBMvacuolated muscle fibers are not known. We propose that in IBM b-amyloid protein (Ab) might be the main inducer of NF-kB, since it is accumulated within IBM-abnormal mus- cle fibers before other abnormalities are apparent [4]. Ab is a potent activator of NF-kB in neuronal cultures [16]. In Alzheimer-disease (AD) brain, NF-kB is increased in close proximity to the Ab-containing plaques [16], and neurofibrillary tangles and dystrophic neurites also contain NF-kB immunoreactivity [20].

Our lack of detection of NF-kB in muscle nuclei could be due to (1) the fact that only a small portion of cellular NF-kB translocates to the nucleus [21], or (2) that access of our antibodies to NF-kB in muscle nuclei might be blocked, perhaps by NF-kB being bound to DNA (or a nuclear protein). In addition, since NF-kB participates in its own regulation [7,8,18], there is a possibility that at any given moment its accumulation in the cytoplasm of IBM muscle is strongly increased while its translocation to the nucleus is more limited. Similarly, in AD brain most of the NF-kB immunoreactivity is present in the cytoplasm of affected neurons, and a much smaller amount is detected in the nuclei [9,16,20,21]. The reason that only a small proportion of IBM-abnormal muscle fibers contained immunoreactive active-form-p65 is not known. Possibilities include: (1) within the muscle fibers only a small portion of p65 is activated and active-form-p65 is very transient; (2) the immunoreactive epitope of the active form was less accessible to the monoclonal antibody used than were p65 and p50 components to their respective polyclonal antibodies.

The mechanism of NF-kB activation and its subsequent function in both IBM and AD are not understood. In AD, it was postulated that reactive oxygen intermediates might act as an intermediate step in NF-kB induction [16]. The same possibility applies to IBM muscle fibers, which manifest evidence of oxidative stress [3]. Other factors possibly contributing to NF-kB induction in IBM are the (1) aged cellular environment, and (2) increased IL-1b and IL-6 [13], known NF-kB inducers [12,14].

In human necrotic muscle fibers, the cause of the NF-kB increase and its role in necrotic fibers are not known. One possibility is that the necrotic fibers have excessive oxidative stress, which upregulates NF-kB.

Our novel localization of NF-kB p65 postsynaptically at human NMJs suggests that NF-kB plays a role in nervemuscle interaction, perhaps in modulating subsynaptic expression of trophic influences received from the motor axon. Previously, NF-kB p50 was localized in postsynaptic densities of the rat central nervous system [19]. The fact that different NF-kB subunits are localized at different synapses could be related to their specific roles at different synapses, and/or species differences.   

Fig. 1 .1Fig. 1. Light-microscopic immunofluorescence of NF-kB epitopes in IBM-abnormal muscle fibers. (A,E) p50; (B,C) p65; (D) active-form-p65 (Ap65); (F) SMI-31, recognizing phosphorylated tau, double-labeled with (E).All NF-kB epitopes are strongly immunolocalized within abnormal muscle fibers. In most fibers, NF-kB immunoreactivity is mainly in a squiggly pattern; in (B) there is also one large 'plaque-like' inclusion. By double-labeled fluorescence in (E,F) there is co-localization between p50 and SMI-31 immunoreactivities. Magnification: 800×.

Supported in parts by grants from the National Institute of Health and the Muscular Dystrophy Association (to V.A.), and by the USC Neuromuscular Center Research Fund. C.-C.Y. was a postdoctoral fellow in Dr. Askanas' laboratory and was supported by the National Taiwan University Hospital.

Fig. 2 .2Fig. 2. Immunoelectronmicroscopy of NF-kB in IBM. Peroxidase reaction. (A) Immunoreactivity of p65 is localized to a cluster of paired-helical filaments (PHFs) within a vacuole, whereas the adjacent normal portion of the muscle fiber is not immunostained. (B) Higher magnification of p50 immunoreactivity in a cluster of PHFs. Magnification: (A) 11 000×, (B) 21 000×.

Fig. 3 .3Fig. 3. Light-microscopic NF-kB immunofluorescence. (A,B) p50 epitope strongly immunoreactive in necrotic muscle fibers. (C,D) Double-labeled fluorescence of two normal human neuromuscular junctions: (C) NF-kB p65; (D) a-bungarotoxin (a-BT) bound to the postsynaptic nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. There is a co-localization between p65 and a-BT, with p65 seeming to occupy a slightly larger territory. Magnification: 800×.

