Rimmed Vacuoles With 13-Amyloid and Ubiquitinated Filamentous Deposits in the Muscles of Patients With Long-Standing Denervation (Postpoliomyelitis Muscular Atrophy): Similarities With Inclusion Body Myositis

In the chronically denervated muscles of patients with prior paralytic poliomyelitis, there are secondary myopathic features, including endomysial inflammation and rare vacuolated fibers. To assess the frequency and characteristics of the vacuoles and their similarities with those seen in inclusion body myositis (IBM), we examined 58 muscle biopsy specimens from patients with prior paralytic poliomyelitis for (1) the presence of rimmed vacuoles; (2) acid-phosphatase reactivity; (3) Congo-red-positive amyloid deposits;

(4) electron microscopy, searching for tubulofilaments; and (5) immunoelectron microscopy, using antibodies against [$-amyloid and ubiqnitin. We found vacuolated muscle fibers in 18 of 58 (31%) biopsies, with a mean frequency of 2.06 +-0.42 fibers per specimen. The vacuoles contained acid phosphatase-positive material in 6 of the 18 (33.30%) specimens and stained positive for Congo red in five (27.80%). By immunoelectron microscopy, the vacuoles contained 5.17 _+ 0.13 nm fibrils and 14.9 -+ 0.31 nm filaments that immunoreacted with antibodies to [~-amyloid and ubiquitin in a pattern identical to the one seen in IBM. We conclude that vacuolated muscle fibers containing filamentous inclusions positive for amyloid and ubiquitin are not unique to IBM and the other vacuolar myopathies but can also occur in a chronic neurogenic condition, such as postpoliomyelitis. The chronicity of the underlying disease, rather than the cause, may lead to vacuolar formation, amyloid deposition, and accumulation of ubiquitinated filaments. HuM PATnOL 29:1128-1133.

Inclusion body myositis (IBM) is an inflammatory myopathy histologically characterized by primary endomysial inflammation, rimmed vacuoles, and nuclear or cytoplasmic tubulofilamentous inclusions, l"s Postpoliomyelitis muscular atrophy (PPMA) is a neurogenic disease characterized by new muscle weakness and atrophy of muscles previously affected by an attack of acute paralytic poliomyelitis2 ,1° In the muscle biopsy specimens of patients with old polio, myopathic features secondary to old denervation have been initially noted by Drachman et al 1~ and later by Dalakas. 12,13 Although PPMA is unrelated to IBM, some of the secondary myopathic features seen in the postpolio muscles, such as endomysial inflammation, 12 rare vacuolated fibers, 9 large fibers with internal nuclei and small fibers in groups, resemble those seen in IBM. 1,2,5 A neurogenic process may also coexist in IBM patients. 2 The aforementioned associations prompted us to review and examine in the current study muscle biopsy specimens from PPMA patients for (1) the presence and frequency of rimmed vacuoles; (2) deposition of

METHODS

Patients

Muscle biopsy specimens from 58 patients with history of paralytic poliomyelitis were examined. All patients, mean age 57.36 + 1.15 years, were admitted to the National Institutes of Health, Clinical Center, and studied under approved clinical protocols. All patients had a history of acute paralytic polio in childhood or adolescence documented as well as possible by the clinical occurrence of an acute febrile illness followed by paralysis occurring during epidemics. All patients had symptoms consistent with PPMA and fulfilled the following criteria, as previously described12,13: (1) partial recovery of motor function after polio and functional stability or recovery for at least 15 years; (2) residual muscIe atrophy, weakness, and arreflexia in at least one limb but with normal sensation; (3) new symptoms of muscle weakness, atrophy, fasciculations, and fatigue unrelated to any other neurologic or medical disorder; and (4) electrophysiological features of old denervation and reinnervation with unstable motor units, as described. 0,1°,13 Patients without definite new muscle weakness or with symptoms due to injury, compression neuropathy from the use of crutches or wheelchairs, or radiculopathies were excluded. Patients were also excluded if they had diabetes, polyneuropathy, collagen vascular disease, exposure to toxic agents, other major viral illness, or a family history of neuromuscular disease.

After giving informed consent, the patients underwent an open muscle biopsy, taken either from previously affected muscles, which had been fully or partially recovered, or from newly" atrophic but historically unaffected muscles. None of the muscles had a known history of injury or needle insertions for at least 6 months before biopsy. Muscle biopsy specimens were flesh-frozen in isopentane cooled to -160°C with liquid nitrogen, following standard techniques.

Muscle Biopsies

Light Microscopy and Immunocytochemistry. Standard enzyme histochemistry was performed on 10-pm transverse sections of fresh-frozen muscle biopsies. Serial, 5-pro sections were also stained with (1) modified Gomori trichrome stain;

(2) acid-phosphatase reaction; (3) Congo red staining looking for congophilic amyloid deposits within the vacuolated muscle fibers; and (4) monoclonal antibody against [3-amyloid peptide (Zymed), or a polyclonal IgG antibody against ubiquitin (Dako), diluted 1:10, in an peroxidase-antiperoxidase method, visualized by 3,3'-diaminobenzidine reaction, as described. 15

Immunoelectron Microscopy. Immunoreactivity for ubiquitin and [3-amyloid was examined within the vacuolated fibers on 15-pro frozen sections adhered to the bottom of plastic Petri dishes. 16 The sections were fixed in 2% glutaraldehyde-1.2% paraformaldehyde mixture for 1 hour, postfixed in 1% osmium for 30 minutes at 4°C, dehydrated in graded series of increasing ethanol concentrations, and embedded in situ, using Spurt epoxy resin at 60°C. The embedded sections were compared with an adjacent cross section stained with trichrome to identify the vacuolated muscle fibers, as described. 16 Selected rimmed vacuoles were marked, drilled out with a 2.0-ram diameter core, and inserted (or mounted) in Spurr blank blocks using glue. Ultrathin sections were cut and mounted on 200-mesh nickel grids.

For single immunolocalization, the colloidal gold posternbedded method was used. 17 The sections were preincubated in etching components in a saturated solution of sodium metaperiodate, 17 followed by incubation with either a monoclonal anti-[3-amyloid peptide diluted 1:10, or a polyclonal anti-ubiquitin antibody diluted 1:100 (Dako). After extensive washing, sections were incubated for 1 hour with the secondary antibody, either a 10-nm gold-labeled goat anti-mouse IgG (Amersham) or a 10-rim gold-labeled goat anti-rabbit IgG (Amersham) diluted 1:20 in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). The PBS was supplemented with 0.5 % bovine serum albumin, fraction V, and 0.1% gelatin. The sections were stained slightly with uranyl acetate and lead citrate. The grids were then examined in a JEOL 100 CX ultramicroscope at 80 kV. Specificity of immunoreactivity was determined by omitting the primary antibody or replacing it with nonimmune serum.

RESULTS

General Histological Findings

The most common findings were signs ofreinnervation with very large groups of muscle fibers and nuclear clumps and occasional small angulated fibers, as described. 4,~2,13 In the biopsy specimens from muscles previously affected but incompletely recovered, secondary myopathic features were frequent. 4,1s These included variation of fiber size with large fibers, internal nuclei, splitting, small round fibers, occasional vacuolated fibers (described below), rare signs of phagocytosis, focal areas of mild inflammation, and increased connective tissue (Fig 1).

Presence and Frequency of Vacuoles

Among the 58 muscle biopsy specimens, muscle fibers with rimmed vacuoles were noted in 18 (31.03%) of them (Fig 2A , B). These muscles had secondary myopathic features and were obtained from the quadriceps (11 specimens), biceps (four specimens), gastrocnemius (two specimens), and deltoid (one specimen). The number of the vacuolated muscle fibers was counted in the whole muscle biopsy specimen from each of the 18 biopsy specimens, and their frequency was calculated as a percentage of the total number of fibers counted in three fields at ×20 magnification. A mean of 2.06 + 0.42 (range, 1 to 8) vacuolated muscle fibers were noted in each of the 18 specimens. The frequency of vacuolated fibers in the three counted fields, containing a mean of 32.4 _+ 0.63 (range, 21 to 53) fibers, was 0.74 -+ 0.3%. In 5 of 18 (27.78%) of these specimens there was mild, focal, endomysial inflammation, often in areas remote from the vacuoles (Fig 2C). The mean age of tile patients with these features was 55.6 + 4.0 (range, 49 to 73).

Characterization of the Vacuoles

Light and Electron Microscopy. A summary of the frequency of the vacuoles and their characteristic features is shown in Table 1.

DISCUSSION

Among the "secondary" myopathic features seen in the chronically denervated muscles of patients with HUMAN PATHOLOGY Volume 29, No. 10 (October 1998) FIGURE 1. Cross section of a fresh-frozen muscle biopsy specimen from a postpolio patient. The specimen, stained with Gomori trichrome stain, shows "secondary" myopathic features characterized by variation of fiber size, internal nuclei, increased connective tissue, rare vacuolated fibers, and nuclear clumps. (Original magnification x 100.) FIGURE 2. Cross section of a fresh-frozen muscle biopsy specimen from a postpolio patient. The specimen, stained with Gomori trichrome stain, shows muscle fibers containing rimmed vacuoles (A, B). A few mononuclear cells are noted around one vacuolated fiber (B). Most often, however, mild focal inflammation was seen in areas remote from the vacuolated fibers (C) (A,C: original magnification ×200, B, original magnification x400). immunoreacts with antibodies against 6-amyloid (lower inset). With immunagold electron microscopy of the same field using antibodies to 13-amyloid, the fibrils are 13-amyloid positive (B, C). Amorphous material present within the vacuole immunoreacts also with !~-amyloid (D). No immunoreactivity by electronmicroscopy is noted in the control (E) (A: ×95,000, B-D: ×46,000). FIGURE 5. Fresh-frozen section of a muscle biopsy specimen from a postpolio patient stained with Gomori trichrome, shows vacuoles within two muscle fibers (inset) (A). Electronmicroscopy of the same feld shows filamentous inclusions (A). Immunogold electronmicroscopy of the same field, using anti-ubiquitin antibodies (B), shows specific immunoreactivity of the tubulofilaments with ubiquitin (original magnification ×46,000).

HUMAN PATHOLOGY Volume 29, No, 10 (October 1998) *Seen in 18 of the 58 muscle specimens examined. Myopathic features were observed in previously affected and partially or fully recovered muscles, and consisted of variation of fiber size, increased connective tissue, hypertrophic fibers, multiple nuclei, fiber splitting, atrophic round fibers, nuclear clumps, inflammation, fiber degeneration, or vacuolization.

prior paralytic poliomyelitis, we have identified muscles fibers with rimmed vacuoles containing amyloid deposits and tubulofilaments that immunoreacted for [3-amyloid and ubiquitin in a pattern identical to the one seen in patients with sporadic IBM. 1,16,18 The findings indicate that the histological and immunoelectron microscopic features of the rimmed vacuoles and their filaments seen in patients with IBM and other vacuolar myopathies also can be seen in a chronic, long-standing, neurogenic condition.

"Secondary" myopathic features consisting of degenerating muscle fibers, increased connective tissue, hypertrophic fibers with multiple nuclei, fiber splitting, round atrophic fibers, nuclear clumps, and inflammation that coexist with denervation, are known to occur in chronic denervating diseases such as Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, spinal muscular atrophies, chronic neuropathies, and postpolio state. ~1,1~,19,2°,~1 Furthermore, in the postpolio muscles, there are hypertrophic, "motheaten" fibers, with impaired oxidative enzyme content, abnormal distribution of mitochondria, and abnormal oxidative phosphorylation by in vivo 31p magnetic resonance spectroscopy. 22 It has been proposed that these hypertrophic fibers are due to overuse, whereas their "moth-eaten" appearance may be due to inadequate adaptation of the mitochondria to proliferate and keep pace with the metabolic needs of the increasing volume of the muscle fiber. 12 The rimmed vacuoles observed in the current study, however, may not be a consequence of a similar adaptation process in the large fibers because vacuoles are noted not only in the hypertrophic fibers but also in fibers of normal size and appearance (Fig 1). Because the vacuoles contain acid phosphatasepositive material and cytoplasmic degradation products with ubiquinated filaments, an autophagic degradation process appears to be involved in their formation. One may argue that the five postpolio patients with vacuolated fibers in their muscle biopsy specimens may have developed a form of IBM that may theoretically explain part of the new muscle weakness. Such a possibility, however, seems unlikely because the few vacuolated muscle fibers were limited to the previously affected and partially recovered muscles that had electrophysiological signs of severe denervation and reinnervation but minimal inflammation. Furthermore, the rate of progression of the weakness in postpolio syndrome is extremely slow, noticeable in decades, compared with IBM, where progression is noticeable in months. The coexistence of two rare pathological processes also may seem unlikely.

Certain morphological abnormalities are common in the muscles of patients with chronic conditions of myopathic or neurogenic origin. Histological signs of myopathy, including vacuoles and inflammation, are variably seen not only in chronic polio, as described earlier, but also in spinal muscular atrophy, another chronic denervating disease. 2~ Conversely, vacuolated fibers are common features in the muscle biopsy specimens of patients with certain distal myopathies such as IBM and oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy, where signs of denervation have been also observed, z4-27 Furthermore, as noted in the current study, the rimmed vacuolated fibers seen in myopathic and neurogenic conditions have similar filamentous characteristics and immunostainable properties, suggesting a common pathogenetic origin. Perhaps the chronicity, rather than the cause of the underlying disease, may play a role in the vacuolar formation and the endomyofibrillar deposition of amyloid and ubiquitinated filaments. Formation of such cytoskeletal degradation proteins is common in chronic neurodegenerative conditions, including Alzheimer's disease. Furthermore, amyloid formation is found in long-standing complications of chronic tissue damage, such as chronic cardiac valvular disease ("dystrophic amyloid") .2s

The origin of the filaments, which are not only seen in vacuolar myopathies but also in other conditions, such as Paget's disease 29 or giant cell tumors, 3° remains unknown. On the basis of their size and longitudinal periodicity, it has been suggested that these filaments may represent viral structures.14,~l In the postpolio state, a chronic condition that follows a viral illness, there is no indication that the poliovirus persists. 13 Furthermore, we have failed to amplify by polymerase chain reaction poliovirus RNA in the muscle biopsy specimens of postpolio muscles, including specimens with vacuoles. 32 Similar attempts in IBM muscles have been also negative for mumps 33 and other viruses, ~4 suggesting that a conventional virus may not be involved in the formation of the vacuoles and their filamentous deposits. The absence of viral persistence, however, does not exclude the possibility that viruses might have served as triggering agents in the causation of these disorders.

In summary, the current study shows that vacuolated muscle fibers with all their accompanying proteinaceous or autophagic contents can be formed not only in myopathies but also in chronic neurogenic condi-tions. The spectrum of neuromuscular diseases characterized by such vacuoles needs to be broadened beyond the IBM or the other vacuolar myopathy groups, whereas the suggestion that a n eurogenic component may be a contributing factor in the development of some pathological features seen in IBM muscles needs to be reexamined.

In 6 of 18 (33.33%) specimens, some of the vacuoles contained acidphosphatase-positive material (Fig 3A, B). By electron microscopy, the vacuoles contained cytoplasmic degradation products consisting of myeloid structures, membrane fragments, and debris (Fig 3C). Within the vacuolated muscle fibers, cytoplasmic tubulofilaments and fibrils were also observed in 5 of the 18 (27.78%) biopsy specimens (Figs 4A and 5A), all of which had also signs of endomysial inflammation. The diameter of the fibrils, measured in 53 of them, averaged 5.17 _+ 0.13 nm (Fig 4A), whereas the diameter of the tubulofilaments, measured in 101 of them, averaged 14.91 _+ 0.31 nm (Fig 5A). Immunocytochemistry and Immunoelectron Microscopy. With Congo red staining, viewed by polarized light, intracellular, green-birefringent amyloid congophilic deposits were demonstrated within the vacuoles in 5 of 18 (27.78%) specimens (Fig 4A). Antibodies against [3-amyloid peptide showed strong immunoreactivity within the vacuoles in seven of the biopsy specimens (Fig 4B,C). In addition, amorphous material that immunostained for [3-amyloid (Fig 4D) was observed within some of the vacuoles. Controls were negative (Fig 4E). The antibodies against ubiquitin immunostained most of the filaments (Fig 5B).

FIGURE 3 .FIGURE 4 .34FIGURE 3. Serial muscle biopsy sections, stained with trichrome (A), and acid-phosphatase (B), show increased acid-phosphatase activity within the same vacuole. (original magnification x200.) With toluidine blue-stained semi-thin sections (inset) [C], intracellular inclusions are identified (arrow) (original magnification x400). Electron microscopy of the same field (C) shows vesicular bodies, electrondense myeloid membranes, membrane fragments, and debris, most prominent in the subsarcolemmal areas (C). (original magnification × 15, 800 .)

TABLE 1 .1Histological and Immunocytochemical Characteristics of the Vacuoles in the Postpolio Muscle Biopsy Specimens With Secondary Myopathic FeaturesNumberof BiopsySpecimensPercentMyopathic features*18/58(31.03%)Vacuolated fibers5/18(27.80%)Characteristics of the vacuolatedfibers with light microscopyAcid phosphatase (+) fibers6/18(3~.30%)Congo red (+) fibers5/18(27.80%)J3-amyloid (+) fibers5/18(27.80%)Ubiquitin (+) fibers5/18(27.80%)Characteristics of the vacuolesby electronmicroscopyTubulofilaments (14.9 + 0.3nm)5/1827.80%)Fibrils (5.17 ± 0.13 nm)5/1827.80%)Anti-J3 amyloid (+) fibrils5/1827.80%)Anti-ubiquitin (+) tubulofila-ments5/1827.80%)

