␤APP and neuromuscular junction formation 6111p

Introduction

␤-amyloid precursor protein (␤APP) is a cell-surface glycoprotein containing a large extracellular domain, a transmembrane domain and a short cytoplasmic carboxyl-terminus domain (reviewed in Ref. 1). The ␤APP gene produces at least three alternatively spliced transcripts encoding ␤APP containing 695, 751 and 770 amino acids; the last two have in their extracellular region a Kunitz-type protease inhibitor. 1 695-␤APP is present in neurons, while 751-and 770-␤APP, but not 695-␤APP, are present in other tissues. 1 Biological functions of ␤APP are still not well understood, but it has been proposed to play a role in mediating cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions, maintenance of cell integrity and shape, and neurite growth (reviewed in Refs 1,2).

␤APP and its epitope ␤-amyloid protein (A␤) a 39-43 residue polypeptide, are considered to play an important role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease (AD). 3 Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM) and hereditary inclusion-body myopathies (h-IBMs) are the only human diseases in which pathological accumulation of ␤APP, including the A␤ epitope, and increases of ␤APP-751 mRNA have been identified outside the brain. [4][5][6] In s-and h-IBM, ␤APP and its mRNA accumulate in vacuolated muscle fibers, and precede other identified abnormalities (reviewed in Ref. 7).

s-IBM is the most common progressive muscle disease beginning in patients age 50 and older. 7 h-IBM encompasses several autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive syndromes manifesting progressive muscle weakness beginning in the second or third decade. 7 The abnormal genes are not known, but one autosomal recessive form is linked to chromosome 9p1-q1 (reviewed in Ref. 8). In addition to abnormal accumulation of ␤APP, s-and h-IBM vacuolated muscle fibers contain abnormal accumulations of several other proteins characteristic of AD brain, as well as congophilic amyloid. 

Impaired innervation of cultured human muscle overexpressing ␤APP experimentally and genetically: relevance to inclusion-body myopathies

into normal cultured human muscle fibers induces in them aspects of the IBM phenotype, including vacuolization. 9,10 In the normal adult human muscle fibers, accumulation of ␤APP and its mRNA is present only at the postsynaptic domain of neuromuscular junctions (NMJs), suggesting that ␤APP may play a role in nerve-muscle contact, either by itself or through its interaction with other postsynaptic proteins. 11 Because IBM muscle has morphological and electrophysiological evidence of denervation, 7 we studied whether ␤APP-over-expressing normal human muscle fibers and h-IBM muscle fibers manifest abnormalities of innervation in culture.

Materials and Methods

Muscle cultures: Human muscle was aneurally cultured in monolayer from satellite cells in portions of diagnostic muscle biopsies (obtained with informed consent), according to our previously described method. 12 Muscle cultured from patients who were considered free of muscle disease after all diagnostic studies served as controls. h-IBM muscle cultures were established from biopsies of five Iranian-Jewish patients (ages 36-59 years) with quadriceps-sparing autosomal-recessive inclusion-body myopathy; in all of them linkage to chromosome 9p1-q1 was established, 13 and all had the characteristic h-IBM features in their muscle biopsies (reviewed in Ref. 7). Five different control culture sets (each from a different biopsy of patients aged-matched or older than the h-IBM patients) served as controls for five h-IBM culture sets.

Innervation: Four to five days after myoblast fusion, explants of whole transverse slices of 12-to 14-day-old rat embryo spinal cord with dorsal root ganglia attached were placed on the muscle monolayer cultures, four fragments per petri dish, as described. 12,14 Living cultures were observed every other day by phase-contrast microscopy and their contractions were video monitored.

␤APP-gene transfer:

In eight additional sets of control cultures, each from a different normal muscle biopsy, a 3-Kb human 751-␤APP-cDNA was transferred into the aneurally cultured myotubes immediately after myoblast fusion, using a replication-deficient recombinant adenovirus (RDRA) vector at 0.3 × 10 8 pfu/ml culture medium. RDRA-␤APP construction and methods of transfer of the ␤APP gene into cultured human muscle were as detailed elsewhere. 10,11 In our previous studies, this dose of transferred ␤APP-cDNA did not induce morphological abnormalities in cultured human muscle until 5-6 weeks after the transfer. 10,11 Three days after ␤APP-gene transfer, ␤APP-over-expressing and sister control-muscle cultures were co-cultured with fetal rat spinal cord, as above.

Immunostaining of ␤APP-epitopes: Immunofluorescence studies on aneurally cultured muscle fibers were performed as described, 10 using the following well-characterized rabbit antibodies directed against ␤APP epitopes: (a) R37, against C-terminal sequence 681-695 of ␤APP (C-␤APP), 15 diluted 1:200, (b) T97, against N-terminal sequence 18-38 of ␤APP (N-␤APP), 15 diluted 1:200, and (c) R1282, against A␤ sequence 1-40, 16 diluted 1:500. Specificities of those antibodies in our studies of human muscle have been described. 4,5,10 Determination of acetylcholine receptors (AChRs) and acetylcholinesterase (AChE): 2, 4 and 6-week-old muscle-spinal cord co-cultures were incubated and processed for autoradiography of [ 125 I]␣-bungarotoxin (␣BT; DuPont NEN) labeled AChRs and AChE enzymatic staining, as described elsewhere. 14 

Results

␤APP epitopes in aneurally cultured muscle fibers:

In cultured h-IBM muscle, ␤APP epitopes were accumulated by 2-4 days after myoblast fusion (Fig. 1B-D). Cultured normal muscle into which the ␤APP gene was transferred had significantly increased ␤APP immunoreactivity 2 days after transfer (Fig. 1F-H). As in our previous studies, 10,11 there was no immunoreactivity of ␤APP epitopes in unaltered control cultured human muscle fibers (Fig. 1A,E).

Innervation of cultured human muscle fibers:

Control Muscle: As in our previous studies, 12,14 2-3 days after co-culturing spinal-cord explants with the muscle cultures, long neurites were emerging from the spinal cord explants and ending on muscle fibers. Four to six days after co-culturing with the spinalcord, individual muscle fibers began contracting. Two weeks after co-culture, large areas of muscle fibers (70-90% of the culture) continued to contract and were entirely cross-striated (Fig. 2A). AChR clusters and AChE-positive patches were present only at the neuromuscular contacts (Fig. 2D,G), being on 70-90% of the muscle fibers. Continuously contracting innervated muscle fibers could be maintained for up to 5 months. By contrast, human muscle fibers cultured aneurally do not contract, have only patchy cross-striations, and only very slight and diffusely distributed AChRs and AChE. 12,14 In contrast to innervated control muscle cultures, 80-90% of h-IBM muscle fibers co-cultured with spinal cord explants did not become cross-striated, and they were either not contracting or had very slow and irregular contractions. Neurites emerging from the spinal cord explants did not end of the muscle fibers, but were trespassing them (Fig. 2B). AChRs were diffusely distributed (Fig. 2E), and only 10-15% of the fibers had AChR clusters. AChE was distributed along the muscle membrane in a thin line and moderately in the cytoplasm (Fig. 2H). Between 3 and 4 weeks after co-culture, most of the muscle fibers became vacuolated, and they could not be maintained longer than 5-6 weeks after co-culture.

Similarly to h-IBM muscle, virtually all the ␤APPover-expressing muscle fibers co-cultured with spinal cord explants were not cross-striated and were not contracting. Neurites outgrowing from the spinal cord explants were trespassing muscle fibers (Fig. 2C). AChRs were present diffusely (Fig. 2F), and only 2-3% of the fibers had AChR clusters. AChE was present along the membrane in a thin line or diffusely in the cytoplasm (Fig. 2I). At 3-4 weeks after co-culture, most of the muscle fibers were vacuolated, and they could not be maintained longer than 5-6 weeks. The impaired innervation was not due to an effect on spinal cord neurons of ␤APP fragments released to the medium because treatment of control co-cultures with conditioned medium obtained from ␤APP-over-expressing cultures did not influence innervation. Impaired innervation was not due to the effect of the adenovirus vector itself because transfer of muscle glycogenphosphorylase gene via the same adenovirus vector actually had a beneficial influence on muscle innervation. 17

Discussion

In this study, we demonstrate for the first time that cultured normal human muscle experimentally overexpressing ␤APP, and cultured h-IBM muscle, do not become properly innervated. In addition, cultured h-IBM muscle fibers show increased accumulation of ␤APP epitopes. We presume that in cultured h-IBM muscle fibers it is the genetic defect that directly or indirectly causes their increased accumulation of ␤APP. We postulate that in both types of cultured muscle fibers the impairment of innervation is due to their increased ␤APP, since this is the only abnormal component presently known that cultured h-IBM and muscle carrying the ␤APP gene have in common. We conclude that the impairment of innervation is due to the intracellular over-expression of ␤APP (the whole molecule or epitopes thereof), because treatment of cultures with conditioned medium containing large amounts of A␤1-40 and A␤1-42 (Xia, McFerrin,Engel, Selkoe and Askanas, 1997, unpublished), and possibly other soluble ␤APP epitopes did not influence innervation.

Studies by others have demonstrated that increased intracellular levels of ␤APP promote neurite growth in co-cultures established between ␤APP-transfected Chinese hamster ovary cells and embryonic rat hippocampal neurons, whereas treatment of cultures with a conditioned medium containing soluble (s) domains of ␤APP (s-␤APP) and A␤ did not induce that effect. 18 In the brain, ␤APP has been proposed to function as a cell-surface receptor capable of interacting with G-proteins. 19 Co-localization of ␤APP with ␤1 integrin, and ␤APP binding to the neuritepromoting site of laminin, have also been demonstrated. 20,21 Both integrin and laminin are components of the extracellular matrix of many cells types, including muscle. Whether these mechanisms can influence neurites to trespass, rather than end on and form junctions at the muscle fibers containing excessive ␤APP is not known. In h-IBM and after ␤APP-gene transfer, increased immunoreactivity with all three ␤APP epitopes is expressed in the form of strongly immunoreactive patches or dots, while control is negative. ×1100. Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/neuroreport by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hC

␤APP and neuromuscular junction formation 6111p

Molecular mechanisms governing NMJ formation and maintenance have been reviewed. 22,23 Both during in vivo embryogenesis and in vitro, formation of NMJ is a highly synchronized, developmentally regulated phenomenon. 22,23 Cultured human muscle can become innervated by co-cultured fetal rat spinal cord neurons only during the 5-7 days after myoblast fusion: older cultured muscle fibers cannot become innervated (V. Askanas, unpublished observations). Properties of the muscle membrane that govern its innervation are largely unknown. 23 Components of the muscle fiber basal lamina, including laminin, are proposed to contribute to a 'stop signal' that inhibits continued growth of axons after encountering uninnervated muscle fibers. 23 In our study we postulate that cellular disturbances caused by the increased ␤APP lead to alterations in the stop signal, which cause the neurites to trespass muscle fibers instead of ending on them, resulting in impaired NMJ formation.

Other possibilities are that the abnormally increased ␤APP, by itself or thru regulation of other proteins, alters molecular properties of the muscle fiber that also cause an axon not to recognize a muscle fiber as a candidate for innervation, or the muscle fiber not to accept or fully maintain the innervation. We have previously termed an inability of a muscle fiber to become innervated and/or maintain the full influence of the innervating axon a 'myogenous dysreception to innervation', and we hypothesized that this mechanism can play a role in the pathogenesis of some muscle disorders. 24 We now propose that this "myogenous dysinnervation" mechanism might be a component of the demonstrated denervation 7 of muscle fibers in s-and h-IBM patients. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: Supported by grants from the National Institute of Health (NS 34103) and the Muscular Dystrophy Association (both to V.A.). We are grateful to Drs D.J. Selkoe and S. Haga for the generous gifts of antibodies.

Conclusions

By demonstrating that the intracellular overexpression of ␤APP in cultured human muscle fibers renders them incapable of becoming normally innervated, we identify a novel adverse function of excessive ␤APP. Further investigations are needed to determine the possible role of a judicious amount of ␤APP beneficially influencing the formation and maintenance of normal NMJs, and a possible adverse influence of excessive ␤APP on NMJ synapses in adult s-and h-IBM and on interneuronal synapses in Alzheimer's disease.

Vol 9 FIG. 1 .91FIG.1. Immunofluorescence staining with antibodies against A␤1-40 (A,B,F), the N-terminal epitope of ␤APP (C,G) and the Cterminal (E,H) of cultured control (A,E) and h-IBM (B-D) muscle fibers, both groups 4 days after myoblast fusion was completed, and of cultured muscle fibers 3 days after ␤APP-gene transfer (F-H). In h-IBM and after ␤APP-gene transfer, increased immunoreactivity with all three ␤APP epitopes is expressed in the form of strongly immunoreactive patches or dots, while control is negative. ×1100. Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/neuroreport by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hC

JFIG. 2. (A-C) Phase-contrast microscopy of 2-week-old muscle-spinal cord co-culture. In control (A), h-IBM (B) and ␤APP-over-expressing (C) cultured muscle. Control muscle fibers are entirely cross-striated, while h-IBM and ␤APP-over-expressing fibers are not cross-striated and have neurites trespassing over them. (D-F) Autoradiography of 125 I␣B denoting AChRs. In control muscle (D), two AChR clusters are present at nerve-muscle contact, h-IBM (E) and ␤APP-over-expressing (F) muscle fibers have AChRs distributed diffusely. (G-I) AChE staining. Control muscle fiber has accumulation of AChE present at the NMJ (G). In h-IBM (H) and ␤APP-overexpressing (I) muscle fibers, AChE is distributed along the muscle fiber membrane and very slightly in the cytoplasm. All ×1100 Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/neuroreport by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hC

TO investigate whether abnormally accumulated ␤APP may be responsible for denervation of muscle fibers that are present in hereditary inclusion-body myopathy (h-IBM) and sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM), we cultured five h-IBM and eight normal muscle biop- sies. In eight other experiments, a 3 kb human 751- ␤APP-cDNA was transferred, using adenovirus vector, into cultured normal myotubes immediately after myoblast fusion. In all experiments, cultured muscle fibers were co-cultured with fetal rat spinal cord. Controls had no detectable ␤APP epitopes, whereas ␤APP epitopes were greatly increased in cultured h-IBM muscle and in cultured normal muscle after ␤APP-gene transfer. Innervated normal cultured muscle fibers were continuously contracting and fully cross-striated, and they had acetylcholine receptors (AChRs) and acetyl- cholinesterase (AChE) accumulated only at the neuro- muscular junctions (NMJs). By contrast, both groups of ␤APP-overexpressing cultured muscle fibers were not contracting and not cross-striated; and did not have NJMs containing AChRs and AChE. Our results suggest that over-expression of ␤APP in cultured muscle fibers inhibits their innervation, and that the accumu- lation of ␤APP in muscle fibers of both h-and s-IBM patients may be responsible for their not becoming or remaining properly innervated or reinnervated, i.e. a 'myogenous-dysinnervation' mechanism. NeuroReport 9: 3201-3205 © 1998 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Key words: ␤APP; Inclusion-body myopathy; Inclusion-body myositis; Innervation; Neuromuscular junction7 Intracellular overexpression of ␤APP thru the transfer of ␤APP gene

