Inflammatory myopathy with cytochrome oxidase negative muscle fibers: Methotrexate treatment

Inflammatory myopathy with cytochrome oxidase negative muscle fibers (IM/COX−) is characterized by slowly progressive weakness, most prominent in the quadriceps, muscle fibers with reduced COX staining and mitochondrial DNA mutations, and a poor response to corticosteroid treatment. We reviewed records of quantitative measurements of muscle strength in 7 IM/COX− patients to evaluate the outcomes after treatment with oral, once weekly, methotrexate for an average of 15 months. We compared the results to 6 patients with IM/COX− who received no long-term immunosuppression, and to 4 with inclusion body myositis (IBM) who received methotrexate during the same period. Methotrexate treatment of IM/ COX− was followed by improved muscle strength in 5 of 7 patients, averaging 17 ± 5%. In contrast, there was no improvement in the strength of 6 untreated IM/COX− patients (−6 ± 4%; P = 0.003), or 4 methotrexate-treated IBM patients (1 ± 2%; P = 0.03). We conclude that, despite clinical similarities to inclusion body myositis, which is usually refractory to immunosuppressive therapy, strength in IM/COX− appears to improve with methotrexate treatment. Biopsy studies of inflammatory myopathies with evaluation of muscle for mitochondrial changes and vacuoles can help to direct the choice of appropriate immunomodulating treatments.

sis, and regenerating muscle fibers; (3) complete absence of muscle fibers containing rimmed vacuoles (after examination of multiple sections from large muscle biopsies containing at least 1000 fibers): and (4) an excess (>3%) of muscle fibers with deficient COX activity. The 3% figure was chosen to represent a number far above the range observed, at any age, in normals from our laboratory and from other previously published data. 5,13 COX staining of muscle was performed as previously described. 2 To determine the percentage of muscle fibers that were COX-negative, a randomly selected region of 300 muscle fibers cut in cross section was evaluated at 400× magnification. The number of fibers with negative COX staining was divided by the total number of muscle fibers. None of the biopsies sampled had Congophilic material in muscle fibers or vessels, as assessed by the Congo red stain.

Patients. We identified 13 patients with IM/COX− who were evaluated and treated in the Washington University neuromuscular center during the period between 1991 and 1997, and had charts available for review. The patients all presented with proximal weakness, usually with loss of strength in the quadriceps out of proportion to the iliopsoas and hamstrings. All patients who had electromyograms performed had abnormalities consistent with an irritable myopathy, including short-duration, smallamplitude motor units and spontaneous muscle fiber activity. Eleven of the 13 patients (85%) had moderately elevated serum CK levels (300-1200), and 2 were normal. The group of 7 methotrexatetreated IM/COX− patients (cases 1-7) averaged 66 ± 3 years of age, and consisted of 4 males and 3 females. All had 5 or more months on a once weekly dosage regimen that averaged 7.5-10 mg given orally. These doses of methotrexate were chosen as they are similar to those that have been demonstrated to be clinically effective in rheumatoid arthritis 4,15,16 and, possibly, some patients with inflammatory myopathies. 8 The treatment period averaged 15 months. The second group of 6 IM/COX− patients (cases 8-13) averaged 65 ± 1 years of age, and consisted of 4 males and 2 females. None received longterm methotrexate treatment. The period of quantitative evaluation averaged 19 months. One patient in this group began methotrexate, but had severe nausea and anorexia, and discontinued the medication after only 3 weeks. Chart review revealed no specific reasons to explain why the other 5 patients were not treated with methotrexate. There was no significant difference between the groups of IM/ COX− patients at onset in terms of the age at time of treatment, sex distribution, length of disease (pretreatment and follow-up), muscle strength (i.e., disease severity), or number of COX− muscle fibers (all P > 0.4). Four patients with IBM (cases I1-I4) were treated with methotrexate during the same period. They had typical features of IBM, including slowly progressive weakness (>1 year), late age of onset (>50 years), proximal and distal weakness involving the quadriceps or flexors of the wrist and fingers, variably elevated serum CK (<1000), electromyography consistent with an inflammatory myopathy, and a biopsy showing inflammation with mononuclear cell invasion of nonnecrotic muscle fibers and vacuolated muscle fibers. 1,3,14 Three of the 4 had amyloid deposits in muscle fibers detected by Congo red stain. The average age at the time of methotrexate treatment was 76 ± 4. The mean length of treatment was 19 months.

We quantified strength using a hand-held dynamometer, as previously described. 11 Six proximal leg muscle groups (bilateral hip flexion, knee extension, and knee flexion), the most prominently involved region, were measured. Measurements of each patient were made by the same examiner, who was blinded to the results of previous testing. Results, in pounds, for each muscle were divided by the expected strength for an adult of the same sex in that muscle group (from standards established in the Washington University Neuromuscular Center) and multiplied by 100 to obtain a percentage of normal. An overall percentage of normal for proximal lower extremity strength was then derived by averaging results from the proximal leg muscle groups noted above. A change in average strength of more than 12% of normal in a patient is significant (P < 0.05). 11 Statistical Methods. The Mann-Whitney rank sum test, or t-test, was used to compare the changes in muscle strength over time in groups of patients.

RESULTS

The change in strength from the onset to the end of the treatment period in the 7 patients treated with methotrexate was an improvement of 17 ± 5%, with a range of −1% to 32% (Fig. 1). This was significantly better (P = 0.003) than the −6 ± 4% change (reduction) in strength in the group of 6 patients who did not receive methotrexate. Five of the 7 patients treated with methotrexate had improvement (>12%, our threshold of significant change 2 ) in their proximal lower extremity strength that ranged from 18% to 32%. These 5 patients all reported important im-provement in their activities of daily living, including walking (much greater distances, more easily, and less fatigue and falling), arising from chairs, and climbing stairs. The onset of subjective improvement usually occurred within 3-6 months of starting therapy (Fig. 2). At the time of the final follow-up quantitative muscle strength testing IM/COX− pa-tients had been treated with methotrexate for durations from 5 to 29 months. In IM/COX− patients with long-term treatment, initial improvements in strength and function were sustained for the entire length of therapy (Fig. 2). Compared to the 5 patients who developed increased strength, the 2 patients with no improvement in strength after metho- trexate treatment had less strength at onset (22% and 34%, versus 48%, 66%, 71%, 84%, and 93% of normal) and a higher percentage of COX− muscle fibers (10% and 27%, versus 4-7%). Most of the patients in the group that did not receive methotrexate had declined in strength at follow-up (5 of 6), and none improved subjectively, or on quantitative muscle testing (>12%). COX− muscle fibers in this group averaged from 4% to 7% of the total. None of the 4 patients with IBM showed improvement in strength during methotrexate treatment, with an average change of 1 ± 2%. This was significantly worse than the average 17% improvement in the IM/ COX− group (P = 0.03).

DISCUSSION

The syndrome of IM/COX− is associated with several characteristic features including an older age of onset (over 60 years in most), prominent and relatively rapidly progressive quadriceps weakness, mildly elevated serum CK (363 ± 115 U/L), and a high prevalence of multiple mitochondrial DNA deletions (90%) in muscle. 2 Our initial experience with IM/COX− patients showed a poor response to corticosteroid therapy. 2 Methotrexate, at dose levels used in this study, is effective in several steroidresistant autoimmune disorders, including rheumatoid arthritis 4,15,16 and occasional patients with corticosteroid-resistant inflammatory myopathies. 8 Also, with appropriate pulmonary and serum monitoring, methotrexate usually has few serious side effects. Up to 75% of rheumatoid arthritis patients remain on the drug after 5 years. 6 Based on these considerations, we administered a regimen of once weekly oral methotrexate to 7 IM/ COX− patients. At the end of a 5-29 month period, patients had improved by 17 ± 5% of normal strength. Most (5 of 7) noted useful functional benefit, such as improved abilities to walk, climb stairs, and arise from chairs. The 2 IM/COX− patients treated with methotrexate who did not improve were much weaker at the onset of therapy, and had a higher percentage of COX-negative muscle fibers in their biopsies than other patients. Other general studies of myositis suggest that more severe weakness or a prolonged course (>18 months) is associated with a reduced likelihood of response to treatment. 7 The outcome in the methotrexate treatment group was significantly better than for 6 IM/COX− patients (P = 0.003) evaluated over a similar time period, who received no long-term methotrexate and for the 4 IBM patients (P = 0.03) who were treated with methotrexate. None of the 10 controls, 6 with IM/ COX− and 4 with IBM, improved significantly on quantitative muscle testing, or noted subjective benefit.

Although prospective trials are necessary, our results suggest that methotrexate may be a useful avenue of therapy for IM/COX− patients, and should be considered as an early therapeutic option. The precise mechanisms underlying the immunosuppressive properties of methotrexate are not completely defined. Methotrexate is a cytotoxic agent with effects on both humoral and cellular immunity. 4,15 Actions that may explain its effects include inhibition of endothelial cell growth, chemotaxis, neovascularization, various cytokine activities, and generation of inflammatory mediators, such as lipoxygenase products. There are probably two biochemical mechanisms of action of methotrexate, inhibition of methylation reactions and promotion of adenosine release. It is likely that the benefit of methotrexate treatment in our IM/COX− patients is related to immunosuppression; however, an action related to the mitochondrial dysfunction cannot be ruled out. Many of the features of IM/COX−, including the distribution of weakness and mitochondrial abnormalities in muscle, are similar to those reported in IBM. 1,9,10 It has been postulated that IM/COX− patients are a subgroup of IBM in which vacuoles are not found on muscle biopsy. 14 However, IBM is generally resistant to immunosuppressive therapies. We expected, in parallel with the experience in IBM, that treatment with immunosuppressive drugs might produce little benefit for IM/COX− patients. In contrast, although the interpretation of our study is limited in that it is not prospective or fully blinded, our results suggest that IM/COX− patients may show prominent benefit with methotrexate treatment. This suggests that, whatever the clinical similarities with IBM, the IM/COX− syndrome should be distinguished as strength may improve in response to immunomodulating therapy.

The group of IM/COX− patients emphasizes that, in patients with inflammatory myopathy, analysis of the muscle biopsy with a variety of histochemical stains is useful for diagnosis and direction of treatment. The presence of COX-negative muscle fibers suggests that the weakness may improve after methotrexate, but not corticosteroid, 2 treatment. Additional studies of IM/COX− patients will be required to fully define the efficacy of methotrexate, and to determine whether severe weakness or very frequent COX-negative muscle fibers predict a poor prognosis, even with immunosuppressive treatment using methotrexate. Such studies should be feasible, as IM/COX− is relatively common, appearing with a frequency of 21% in biopsies from patients with polymyositis. 2 

FIGURE 1 .1FIGURE 1. Changes in strength in IM/COX− patients (cases 1-7) and IBM patients (cases I1-I4) with long-term methotrexate treatment compared to all other IM/COX− patients (cases 8-13). Mtx, methotrexate; IBM, inclusion body myositis; Rx, treatment. The top bar graph (a) illustrates changes, in percent of normal strength, in proximal lower extremity muscles from the time of initiation of treatment (or initial evaluation in controls) to the end of the follow-up period. The bottom graph (b) illustrates the percent of normal strength at the initiation of treatment (open bars) and at the final follow-up evaluation.

Figure 2 .2Figure 2.Changes in strength over time in 2 PMCOX− patients (top: case 7; bottom: case 4) before and during long-term treatment with methotrexate. In both patients strength improved beginning within the first 6 months. The patients noted increased ability to walk, arise from chairs, and climb stairs. Patients were stable at improved levels during the second year. In case 7, between onset of methotrexate treatment and the end of followup (29 months), strength improved by 2 pounds in the hip flexors, 6 pounds in the knee extensors, and 18 pounds in the knee flexors. In case 4 strength improved (over 23 months) by 0 pounds in the hip flexors, 21 pounds in the knee extensors, and 26 pounds in the knee flexors.

