Inclusion body myositis: Abnormal protein accumulation does not trigger apoptosis

Article abstract-To examine whether apoptosis may contribute to muscle fiber loss in inclusion body myositis, we used the terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated X-dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL) assay to compare the occurrence of DNA fragmentation in muscle samples from patients with inclusion body myositis and polymyositis. TUNEL-positive nuclei in nonnecrotic muscle fibers were rare even in the vicinity of amyloid-like material; significantly more frequent in polymyositis than inclusion body myositis; and several times less frequent than necrotic muscle fibers or mononuclear cell myocytotoxicity in both patient groups. Apoptosis is unlikely to play a significant role in the pathogenesis of inclusion body myositis.

Inclusion body myositis is a chronic inflammatory myopathy of unknown etiology. Differences from polymyositis include older age at onset, a slower course, particular involvement of certain muscle groups, and a generally poor response to immunotherapy.l A range of proteins accumulate in the cyto- plasm of muscle fibers in inclusion body my0sitis.l Of these, prion protein and p-amyloid can induce apoptosis of neurons in tissue Apoptosis may contribute to the degeneration of muscle fibers in inclusion body myositis.

Apoptosis is a genetically programmed form of cell death, with morphologic and biochemical differences from necrosis. The biochemical hallmark of apoptosis is early degradation of genomic DNA into mononucleosomal and oligonucleosomal DNA fragment^.^ DNA fragmentation suggests apoptosis in cells not showing morphologic evidence of necrosis.

There is indirect evidence that apoptosis may play a role in muscle fiber death in human myopathies. Tidball et a1.5 found DNA changes suggestive of apoptosis in nonnecrotic muscle fibers in the mdx mouse, an animal model of Duchenne dystrophy; Fidzianska and Kaminska6 found ultrastructural evidence for apoptosis in muscle of neonatal rats after injections of bupivacaine.

The Fas (CD95)-receptor can mediate apoptosis in apoptosis-sensitive cells after binding of CD95 antibody or the Fas ligand. Behrens et aL7 found expression of Fas-receptor in up to 35% of muscle fibers in inclusion body myositis, but no DNA fragmentation within myonuclei. Schneider et a1.8 did not observe DNA fragmentation within myonuclei in inclusion body myositis, polymyositis, or dermatomyositis, but the focus of that study was apoptosis of inflammatory cells. The number of muscle fibers examined for DNA fragmentation was not stated in either of these studies.

TUNEL (terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferasemediated X-dUTP nick-end labeling) assay detects nuclear DNA fragmentation in tissue ~e c t i o n s . ~ Pilot studies in our laboratory using a fluorescein TUNEL method suggested that the occurrence of DNA fragmentation in myonuclei in inflammatory myopathies is not zero. Therefore, sequential TUNEL, ethidium bromide, hematoxylin eosin, CD45RB immunoperoxidase, and Congo red reactions in the same tissue sections from patients with inclusion body myositis or polymyositis were analyzed quantitatively for the incidence of DNA fragmentation, muscle fiber necrosis, invasion of nonnecrotic muscle fibers by mononuclear cells, and amyloid deposition.

Materials and methods. Definite inclusion body myositis (four patients) and polymyositis (four patients) were diagnosed by combined clinical, biochemical, electromyographic, and muscle biopsy criteria (table).l Open biopsies from moderately affected limb muscles were flash-frozen and stored at -80 "C. None of the patients received prior immunotherapy. All the patients with polymyositis subsequently responded to steroids; none of the three patients with inclusion body myositis who were given steroids responded.

Five serial 71.1. sections per patient were air-dried, fixed in fresh paraformaldehyde (4% in PBS, pH 7.4) 20 minutes, washed 30 minutes in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), permeabilized in 0.1% Triton X-100, 0.1% sodium citrate 2 minutes on ice, rinsed with PBS, and incubated at 37 "C 1 hour in fluoresceinconjugated nucleotides and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (In Situ Cell Death Detection Kit; Boehringer Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany).* Positive control sections were treated after permeabilization with DNAse 1 (Boehringer Mannheim) 10 mg/mL in 20 mM Tris, 1 mM MgCl, for 10 to 20 minutes a t 37 "C. In negative control reactions, terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase was omitted from the reaction. Sections were then rinsed in PBS, mounted with Vectashield (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA), and viewed systematically at 500X using fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) filters with an Olympus fluorescence microscope (Olympus Optical, Tokyo, Japan). Stage coordinates of fluorescein-positive zones were recorded.

After viewing the TUNEL sections, coverslips were lifted and the sections washed 5 minutes in PBS, incubated in ethidium bromide (0.1 mg/mL 10 minutes), washed, mounted with Vectashield, and viewed with FITC and rhodamine filters. Fluorescein-positive, ethidium bromide-positive zones were photographed. Coverslips were then relifted and the sections were rinsed in PBS, air-dried, stained with hematoxylin-eosin, dehydrated, and mounted. Analysis. The important step in this study was to identify TUNEL-positive myonuclei within nonnecrotic muscle fiber sections (fiber section is the appropriate term because each fiber was examined in serial sections). Fluorescein-positive zones were judged to represent TUNEL-positive nuclei from combined analysis of the TUNEL, ethidium bromide, and hematoxylin-eosin sections. TUNEL-positive nuclei were recorded as endomysial or within a muscle fiber and were photographed. That part of a muscle fiber harboring a TUNEL-positive nucleus was judged to be necrotic in the hematoxylin-eosin section when the cytoplasm was pale and hyalinized or when there was replacement of contractile elements by loose granular material or macrophages. Care was taken not to count the same nucleus in adjacent sections. The frequency of necrotic muscle fiber sections and of autoaggressive invasion of nonnecrotic fiber sections by mononuclear cells were also recorded.

TUNEL assay.

Further stains.

CD45 immunoperoridase. Coverslips were relifted, and the sections were rehydrated, air dried, incubated in DAKO Antigen Retrieval solution at 95 "C 30 minutes, washed in PBS 5 minutes, incubated 30 minutes in CD45RB (leukocyte common antigen) antibody (DAKO, Carpinteria, CA) 1:lOO in 0.01 M PBS, 0.1% bovine serum albumin, then processed using the labeled streptavidin biotin (LSAB) (DAKO) kit. The CD45RB antibody recognizes lymphoid cells, macrophages, and polymorphonuclear cells. The immunoperoxidase sections were used to examine TUNEL-positive nuclei within muscle fibers to identify those that represented lymphocytes or macrophages that had invaded the fiber.

Coverslips were relifted and the sections were rehydrated and stained using a standard alkaline Congo red method. Fiber sections containing TUNELpositive nuclei were viewed with FITC and rhodamine filters to detect wispy or plaque-like congophilic amyloid deposits. A single new tissue section from each patient was also stained with Congo red to determine the overall incidence of congophilic amyloid deposits.

To measure fiber diameters and count total muscle fibers, images of hematoxylin-eosin sections were captured using a Leica microscope (Leica Microscopy, Congo red.

Digitization.

Heerbrugg, Switzerland) and JVC video camera (Yokahama, Japan) and analyzed with NIH Image (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD).

The numbers of CD45-negative TUNELpositive myonuclei within nonnecrotic muscle fiber sections were calculated per lo4 muscle fiber sections for each patient. The numbers of positive nuclei in the inclusion body myositis and polymyositis groups were compared by Poisson regression, considering the number of muscle fiber sections assessed.

Statistics.

Results. TUNEL-positive nuclei were readily detected in all tissue samples (figure). Those of specific relevance were within nonnecrotic muscle fiber sections and were not rimmed by CD45-positive membrane material (T+/"F/ CD45 1. In all, 100 T+/"F/CD45-were identified. There were from 4.5 to 13.7 T'/"F/CD45-per lo4 muscle fiber sections in different patients (see table ). The means +SD were 9.2 ?3.45 in the polymyositis group and 6.6 ? 1.99 in the inclusion body myositis group. Poisson regression indicated a significantly greater frequency in the polymyositis group (chi-square = 5.2, d f = 1 , p = 0.023).

Ninety of the Tt/"F/CD45-appeared in morphologically normal muscle fibers; five were contained in vacuoles; two were in uninvolved segments of fibers that had been invaded by mononuclear cells; two were within regenerating fibers; and one was abutted by an eosinophilic inclusion. Congo red detected amyloid deposits in 3 of the 40 fiber sections harboring Tt/"F/CD45-in inclusion body myositis. In two of these, the T+/"F/CD45 and amyloid deposit were within the same vacuole; the third Tt/"F/ CD45 was also contained in a vacuole but the amyloid deposit was in a different region of the fiber. Overall, congophilic amyloid deposits occurred in 0.5 to 4.4% of muscle fibers in inclusion body myositis (see table). Thus, most myonuclei in the vicinity of amyloid-like material were TUNEL-negative.

The mean cross-sectional area of muscle fibers harboring T*/"FICD45-was marginally less than the mean cross-sectional area of other fibers in all but one patient; the ratios in different patients were 0.72 to 1.13 (mean, 0.85). There were only six examples where two T+/"F/

Figure. TUNEL-positive nuclei within muscle fibers in inclusion body myositis, indicated where necessary with arrowheads. A-D, E-H, and I-L each represent a single tissue section. Rows from top to bottom are TUNEL reaction (FITC fluorescence optics), ethidium bromide (rhodamine fluorescence optics), hematoxylin-eosin, and CD45RB immunoperoxidase. Faint nuclear counterstain in the immunoperoxidase sections is caused by residual hematoxylin. (A-D) TUNEL-positive nucleus in a mononuclear cell that has invaded a nonnecrotic muscle fiber. TUNEL and ethidium bromide images are double-exposed in panel B. (E-H) TUNEL-positive, CD45-negative nucleus within the remnants of a necrotic fiber. (I-L) TUNEL-positive, CD45-negative nucleus within a nonnecrotic fiber. (K) Another necrotic fiber (asterisk). (I) Autofluorescence of connective tissue and lipofuschin is present (bar = 50 pm).

CD45-occurred in the same muscle fiber section or in a different cross-section of the same fiber.

Most of the remaining TUNEL-positive nuclei were within CD45-positive cells, predominantly within endomysium. Few TUNEL-positive nuclei were in necrotic fiber sections and were CD45-negative and probably represent DNA fragmentation resulting from necrosis (see table and figure). Necrotic muscle fiber sections or invasion of nonnecrotic fiber sections by mononuclear cells were together 3.3 to 19.1 times more abundant than T+/"F/CD45-in different patients (see table ).

Discussion. The following observations suggest that the deposition of P-amyloid and other proteins within muscle fibers does not trigger apoptosis in inclusion body myositis: 1) Tt/"F/CD45were not more common in inclusion body myositis than poly-myositis; 2 ) T+/"F/CD45-and congophilic amyloid deposits occurred independently; the overall number of fibers (three) harboring both was close to the number expected by chance; 3) there was no correlation between the frequencies of T+/"F/CD45-and amyloid deposits in different inclusion body myositis patients (see table ); the patient with unusually abundant amyloid deposits did not have the highest frequency of Tf/"F/CD45-.

Moreover, fiber necrosis or invasion of nonnecrotic fibers by mononuclear cells was substantially more common than T+/"F/ CD45-in all patients, suggesting that apoptosis is unlikely to play a significant role in the pathogenesis of polymyositis or inclusion body myositis.

Apoptosis is an undisputed mode of cell death in proliferating tissue in some mammalian organs, but the rare T+/"F/CD45-in this study does not provide unequivocal evidence that apoptotic cell death occurs in skeletal muscle. First, muscle fibers are multinucleated and DNA fragmentation within an isolated nucleus does not imply apoptosis of the entire fiber. Second, a focal zone of apoptosis within a muscle fiber may potentially undergo repair by satellite cell incorporation. Finally, DNA fragmentation does not always denote apoptosis; it can also occur from the action of oxidants or raised cytosolic divalent cations9, factors likely to occur in the vicinity of individual nuclei after focal injury to the muscle fiber in inclusion body myositis or polymyositis.

The absence or low incidence of apoptosis within muscle fibers in inclusion body myositis or polymyositis has additional possible explanations: 1) The stimuli from cytotoxic lymphocytes or abnormal intracellular proteins may be inadequate to trigger apoptosis; 2) the genes necessary to initiate apoptosis may be inactivated in fully differentiated syncytial cells; 3) the expression of anti-apoptotic factors, such as Bcl-2 protein, may be protective7; or 4) proapoptotic signals originating from one muscle fiber domain may be countered by negative signals from neighboring nuclei.

When viewed with other work,lo this study suggests that the muscle fiber loss in inclusion body myositis occurs by necrosis, invasion of nonnecrotic muscle fibers by T-cells, or by other mechanisms yet to be identified. The abnormal accumulation of pro-teins may have a role in the pathogenesis but does not trigger apoptosis.

Acknowledgement

The author thanks Dr. Shiva Reddy for use of the fluorescence microscope; technicians in the histopathology laboratory for helpful advice; Drs. Alistair Stewart and Elizabeth Robinson, Biostatistics Unit, University of Auckland; the Auckland Hospital Medical Illustrations department; and colleagues for referring the patients. From the Department of Neurology, Auckland Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand. Supported by the June Byham bequest. Received March 23, 1998. Accepted in final form August 1, 1998. Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr. D.O. Hutchinson, Department of Neurology, Auckland Hospital, PB 92024, Auckland, New Zealand.

Table Patient details and resultsSingle, new-tissue section per patient.TUNEL-TUNEL-TUNEL-Age (y)/sex/Invasion ofpositive, CD45-positive, CD45-positive, CD45-CRsymptomMuscle fibernonnecrotic fiberpositive nuclei negative nuclei negative nuclei (amyloidbduration (y)/sectionsNecrotic musclesections by(in anyin nonnecroticin necroticpositivediagnosisassessedfiber sections'" mononuclear cells"location)'"fiber sections* fiber sections'K fibers*'t68M7LBM12,17074.098.693.79.00.854.275/M/8/IBM8,22024.342.653.57.39.744466/M/4/IBM32,81515.238.128.35.5014766/F/lO/IBM17,97019.552.929.54.56.71407 1IFIlIPM17,30010.436.446.29.85.2063M2iPM16,10015.5118.0165.813.711.2055/F/1.5/PM10,6304.714.160.25.60.9066lFJ6ff M15,58019.386.771.97.700: K Per lo4.' 1IBM = inclusion body myositis; PM = polymyositis; CR = Congo red.

