Sporadic Inclusion-body Myositis and Its Similarities to Alzheimer Disease Brain Recent Approaches to Diagnosis and Pathogenesis, and Relation to Aging

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM) is the most common, debilitating and progressive muscle disease beginning at the age 50 or later. The most characteristic pathologic feature is vacuolar degeneration of muscle ¢bers accompanied by intra¢ber congophilia and clusters (``tangles'') of paired-helical ¢laments, containing phosphorylated tau. An unusual feature of sporadic inclusion-body myositis is accumulation within its abnormal muscle ¢bers of several proteins that are characteristic of Alzheimer disease brain, including epitopes of b-amyloid precursor protein (bAPP), phosphorylated tau, alpha-1-antichymotrypsin, apolipoprotein E, and presenilin-1. Indicators of oxidative stress are also present within abnormal s-IBM muscle ¢bers. In this review, we describe new advances seeking the pathogenic mechanism of sporadic inclusion-body myositis. We hypothesize on the possible pathogenic role of abnormally accumulated proteins, and we propose that important contributory factors leading to inclusion-body myositis are the milieu of muscle-¢ber aging and oxidative stress. In addition, we present evidence that overexpression of adenovirus-transferred bAPP gene in cultured human muscle ¢bers induces aspects of the inclusion-body myositis phenotype, and suggest that bAPP-overexpression is an early event in the pathogenic cascade causing inclusion-body myositis.

Introduction

The term ``inclusion-body myositis'' was introduced in 1971 by Yunis and Samaha (1) to describe a subset of patients with chronic polymyositis whose biopsy specimens had, in addition to in£ammation, abnormal muscle ¢bers containing characteristic ¢lamentous inclusions in the cytoplasm and nuclei. Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM), formerly underdiagnosed and considered infrequent, is now identi¢ed more and more often by both clinicians and pathologists. Recent interest in s-IBM has been generated by the identi¢cation in IBM muscle ¢bers of b-pleated-sheet amyloid and other striking pathologic features that were not believed to occur in diseased human muscle. These features include abnormal accumulation of b-amyloid protein, two other epitopes of the b-amyloid precursor protein (bAPP), hyperphosphorylated tau, a 1 -antichymotrypsin, apolipoprotein E, ubiquitin, presenilin-1, and cellular prion protein, which previously were considered strictly neuronal and/or characteristic of Alzheimer's disease and prion brain diseases (reviewed below). Increased accumulation of the bamyloid precursor protein and prion results, at least partially, from their increased synthesis. Moreover, increased synthesis of cellular prion has not been previously reported in any human disease (reviewed below).

In 1993, we introduced the term ``hereditary inclusion-body myopathies'' (h-IBMs) (2) to designate hereditary muscle diseases with pathology strikingly resembling that of sporadic IBM, except for lack of lymphocytic in£ammation (and a few other features); hence, the term ``myopathy'' instead of ``myositis''. The h-IBMs encompass several autosomal-recessive and dominant syndromes with progressive muscle weakness and various clinical presentations, but similar features in the muscle biopsy (2,3). The h-IBMs are not a subject of this review, but they are described and classi¢ed in (3, 3a).

In this review, we: summarize clinical features of s-IBM; describe diagnostic pathologic criteria and unusual aspects of muscle pathology of s-IBM; and highlight our recent concepts of pathogenesis.

Summary of clinical features and treatment

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis is the most common muscle disease beginning in patients over age 50 years, and it occurs predominantly in men. The muscle weakness is both distal and proximal. There is a characteristic thinning of the forearm muscles associated with weakness of the ¢nger extensors, £ex-ors, or both. Typically, the quadriceps is prominently involved (3,4). There is also distal lower-limb weakness that can appear early, and proximal weakness of all limbs. The slowly progressive course usually leads to severe disability and eventually to respiratory muscle weakness. Dysphagia is fairly common; it can appear during limb-muscle weakness or infrequently precede it (3,4). In older patients with dysphagia, IBM should be in the di¡erential diagnosis and can be diagnosed by the characteristic limb-muscle biopsy abnormalities (3,4).

Recently, dysphagia associated with in£ammation in the omohyoid and cricopharyngeus muscles was described in seven elderly (69 ^90 years old) patients; they were reported not to have muscle weakness, and histochemistry of one muscle biopsy was considered noncontributory (5). We think it is possible that those patients would have features of IBM in their limb muscle if detailed pathologic studies (see below) would be performed.

Usually, s-IBM is not associated with other systemic disorders. Nevertheless, the following associations deserve mention because they may provide clues to the pathogenesis.

s-IBM and HTLV-1 seropositivity

Recently, we studied an Iranian-Muslim patient from Mashad, an HTLV-1 endemic area of Iran, who has s-IBM. He also has HTLV-1 serum-positivity by Elisa and Western-blot, and leucocyte PCR positivity. This patient had the typical s-IBM muscle-biopsy pathologic phenotype (see below) and had HTLV-1 p19 antigen detected immunohistochemically in abnormal muscle ¢bers (which were not invaded by mononuclear cells) (6,7). Other patients with HTLV-1 and s-IBM have been described, but in them no HTLV-1 antigen was detected in the muscle ¢bers (8). (In our recently diagnosed s-IBM patient from Jamaica with HTLV-1 positivity, immunolocalization of HTLV-1 p19 has not yet been performed.) HTLV-1 and postpolio s-IBM patients enhance the suspicion of a viral cause in these and other s-IBM patients (2, 7).

s-IBM in post-polio patients

Since 1993 we have been following a post-polio patient with slowly progressive muscle weakness and typical s-IBM pathology in the muscle biopsy (she has had a sustained, moderate improvement on 10 mg alternate-day prednisone [7]). A 40-year old postpolio s-IBM patient recently described by Schlesinger et al. (9), has had a signi¢cant and sustained improvement on prednisone and IVIG. Other patients with a post-polio syndrome and IBM muscle pathology have been described (10). These patients raise the suspicion that the previous poliomyelitis virus infection was in some manner related to development of s-IBM. In one study, no poliovirus genome was detectable in post-polio IBM vacuolated muscle ¢bers (11).

s-IBM and transthyretin gene mutation

We are following a 70-year-old African-American male with progressive distal and proximal muscle weakness, cardiomyopathy, and Type-II diabetes. Diphosphonate scan (12) was positive in the heart, strongly suggesting cardiac amyloidosis. EMG showed a neurogenic pattern. CK was elevated, 700/ 160. Muscle biopsy had features characteristic of s-IBM (below) plus two unique features: a) muscle blood-vessel amyloid, which was very strongly immunoreactive with several transthyretin (TTR) antibodies, and b) strong TTR immunoreactivity within the vacuolated muscle ¢bers. Within both the bloodvessels and the muscle ¢bers, there was co-localization of congophilic amyloid deposits with TTR, bAPP epitopes, and ApoE. DNA sequence analysis of the TTR gene revealed a single change (A to G) in codon 122 (V122I), the patient being homozygous for the Ile-122 allele (13).

The TTR Ile-122 allele is the most common cause of senile cardiac amyloidosis among African-Americans (14). We suggest that the TTR Ile-122 allele in our patient might be promoting the amyloid-¢brillogenesis of Ab within the muscle ¢bers and muscle blood vessels. This demonstration of an association between senile cardiac amyloidosis, muscle bloodvessel amyloidosis, and s-IBM, putatively caused by the TTR Ile-122 mutation, suggests that mutation of other susceptibility genes may promote s-IBM in other patients.

Others

A s-IBM patient with a severe, unilateral, levodoparesponsive upper-limb tremor was recently reported (15). Unless more such patients would be identi¢ed, the association is probably coincidental.

``s-IBM'' associated with transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder was reported to improve with prednisone treatment and after tumor removal (16). However, atypical clinical features ^including very high creatine kinase activity, bilateral Babinski responses, and sensory neuropathy ^raise a question regarding diagnosis. s-IBM associated with other diseases such as severe scleroderma, hepatitis C, and renal-cell carcinoma, has been reported rarely (17,18).

Of all s-IBM patients, less than 13% were considered to have an association with one or more immune V. Askanas and W. King Engel disorders (19). It is not known whether those associations are signi¢cant or coincidental.

There is no completely successful treatment for s-IBM (details in 7, 20). In our experience (7), most s-IBM patients bene¢t from the administration of prednisone (20 to 60 mg single-dose on alternate days). This bene¢t is usually modest, but some patients experience signi¢cant improvement of muscle strength and especially endurance (note that clinical quantitation of muscle power usually does not evaluate endurance). With sustained drug treatment, the bene¢t can persist for 6 months to 5 years (and sometimes longer), but normal strength is not restored. Similar bene¢t was reported by other investigators (20 ^22). In our experience, a few s-IBM patients have a de¢nite and reproducible bene¢t from 5-day courses of intravenous immunoglobulin (0.4 g/kg/ day) repeated after skipping two weeks (reviewed in 7). A report of no bene¢t from IVIG were based on faulty design ^the strength measurements were made 4 weeks after the last IVIG dose (23), whereas the IVIG-bene¢t typically persists only 2 weeks, at which point another treatment is needed to achieve summating improvement (7). Perhaps anti-dysimmune treatment of s-IBM is bene¢tting only the in£ammatory myopathy component, but not the changes associated with degenerative vacuolization or denervation, which in our opinion, are usually the major cause of weakness and progression. Depotestosterone, 100 ^200 mg i.m. every 7 ^10 days de¢nitely enhances endurance in some male s-IBM patients (our unpublished observations) (for safety, one must monitor prostate-speci¢c antigen levels and erythrocytosis, and be aware that testosterone combined with prednisone can bring out diabetes). A compendium of published treatments has been recently presented (24).

Light-microscopic histochemistry and ultrastructure of s-IBM muscle biopsies

Characteristic light-microscopic pathologic features of s-IBM are: a) degrees of mononuclear-cell in£ammation varying from abundant in the early stages to little or none in the later stages; b) muscle ¢bers with one or several, irregular and various-sized, vacuoles on a given 10 mm-thick cross-section (Fig. 1). In contrast to what is commonly said in the literature, many vacuoles in IBM are either not rimmed or only slightly rimmed. However, within the vacuoles there is often red-and greenish-staining material manifest by the Engel-Gomori trichrome reaction (25).

Small angular muscle ¢bers that are histochemically dark with the pan-esterase and NADH-tetrazolium reductase reactions are, in general, considered indicative of a recent-denervation component ^they are a characteristic feature of s-IBM muscle biopsies. We (3,4,7) and others (26 ^28) consider that there is an important denervation component in s-IBM, despite a report to the contrary (29).

In a given section, 60 ^80% of the s-IBM vacuolated muscle ¢bers contain foci positive with Congo-red, thio£avin-s or crystal-violet, all of which denote amyloid (34 ^36).

Ragged-red ¢bers, cytochrome-c-oxidase (COX) negative muscle ¢bers, and ultrastructurally abnormal mitochondria containing paracrystalline inclusions indicate mitochondrial abnormality ^they are also features characteristic features of s-IBM pathology (3,4). Multiple mitochondrial DNA deletions (30 ^33) occur in s-IBM muscle ^their contribution to muscle-¢ber degeneration and malfunction is unde¢ned. The pathologic phenotype of s-IBM is summarized in Table I.

Because vacuoles can be very small and sometimes present in only a few muscle ¢bers, s-IBM might, especially in its early stages, be di¤cult to distinguish from polymyositis by routine histochemistry. This may account for the fact that, despite the present interest in and increased awareness of s-IBM, this is still an underdiagnosed or misdiagnosed condition (for example, because s-IBM occurs in older patients and dysphagia can be one of the ¢rst symptoms, s-IBM sometimes is misdiagnosed as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis).

To diagnose s-IBM and help di¡erentiate it from polymyositis by light-microscopy of fresh-frozen sections, we recommend the following (illustrated in Fig. 1):

1. Engel-Gomori trichrome staining (25) to visualize vacuolated muscle ¢bers, mononuclear-cell in£ammation, and ragged-red ¢bers; 2. £uorescence-enhanced Congo-red (36), or non-£uorescent crystal-violet staining (which is easier but somewhat less e¡ective) for small or large foci of amyloid within some of the vacuolated ¢bers; 3. immunocytochemical staining for the presence of paired-helical ¢laments (PHFs) (see below), utilizing SMI-31 monoclonal antibody (originally made to react with phosphorylated heavy-chain of neu-ro¢laments), which recognizes the phosphorylated tau of PHFs in s-IBM (37). 4. If SMI-31 antibody is not available, positive ubiquitin immunoreactivity within muscle ¢bers can be used to di¡erentiate s-IBM from polymyositis (38). This point was further emphasized by a recent study indicating that ubiquitin-positive inclusions were present even in formalin-¢xed para¤nembedded muscle biopsies of s-IBM patients, but not in any other in£ammatory myopathies (39). 5. alkaline phosphatase reaction to evaluate perimysial connective-tissue staining, typically negative (occasionally minimal) in s-IBM, but usually moderate to prominent in active polymyositis and dermatomyositis (3,40).

The ultrastructural diagnostic criterion for s-IBM is the presence of cytoplasmic 15 ^21 nm diameter PHFs, often in clusters (the ``inclusions'' of s-IBM) (3, 41) (Fig. 2). IBM PHFs strikingly resemble PHFs of Alzheimer disease (AD) brain and similarly contain phosphorylated tau (41,42). The appearance of IBM PHFs depends greatly on tissue preparation. In ultrathin sections cut from a muscle biopsy previously ¢xed and embedded for electronmicroscopic studies in a routine manner, the structures composing the inclusions appear as tubulo¢laments, which may display longitudinal periodicity (Fig. 2). In ultra-thin sections cut from epon-embedded 10 mm cryostat sections of a previously-frozen muscle (3) (a technique we routinely use for ultrastructural immunocytochemistry [34, 41 ^44]), IBM tubulo¢laments clearly display a paired-helical ¢lament structure (Fig. 2) (reviewed in 3).

s-IBM vacuolated muscle-¢ber cytoplasm also contains: a) collections of 6 ^10 nm ¢laments (Fig. 2) (34,43), b) ¢ne £occulomembranous material, and c) amorphous material (34,43). Myelin-like whorls and other lysosomal debris are also in the vacuoles.

In 2 ^4% of s-IBM muscle nuclei there are clusters (inclusions) of 15 ^21 nm ``tubulo¢laments'', which in favorable sections are seen to be paired-helical ¢laments like those in the cytoplasm (3).

Unusual aspects of s-IBM morphology and similarities to Alzheimer-disease brain

a. Amyloid deposits. Amyloid denotes the physical con¢guration of a protein aggregated into b-pleated sheets, which stains with Congo-red (i.e Congophilic) and is metachromatically-pink with crystal-violet. A number of di¡erent proteins, including the bamyloid protein part of b-amyloid precursor protein, prion, and tau, have the propensity to self-aggregate into b-pleated-sheet amyloid.

Amyloid deposits can be demonstrated in vacuolated IBM muscle ¢bers by Congo-red, thio£avin-S, or crystal-violet staining (34 ^36). Because the amyloid deposits in IBM muscle ¢bers are very small, they often are di¤cult to see, probably accounting for the occasionally published negative studies (45).

Fluorescence-enhanced Congo-red positivity reveals amyloid in all s-IBM patients and, in them, in 60 ^80% of their vacuolated ¢bers. Locations of amyloid deposits within the vacuolated muscle ¢bers of s-IBM utilizing this technique are illustrated in Fig. 1d,e.

Our current data indicate that PHFs, which contain hyperphosphorylated tau, also contain bpleated-sheet amyloid evidenced by their Congo-red positivity (42). Alzheimer-brain neuro¢brillary tangles, composed primarily of hyperphosphorylated tau, also are Congo-red positive (47 ^49, and below).

In s-IBM muscle ¢bers, the Congophilic amyloid is probably also partially due to abnormally accumulated b-amyloid protein (Ab) (34, 43 and see below), which is a 39 ^42 residue polypeptide portion of the b-amyloid precursor protein (bAPP) (46).

Among our several patients with other non-IBM vacuolar myopathies, including acid-maltase de¢ciency, hypokalemic periodic paralysis, and unde-¢ned types, none had Congophilic amyloid deposits. Abnormal muscle ¢bers in some of these disorders can have, as in s-IBM, increased acid-phosphatase staining, indicating increased lysosomal activity; this increased staining is very prominent in acid-maltase de¢ciency. Because those non-IBM vacuolar-myopathy muscle ¢bers with increased acid-phosphatase do not have Congophilic amyloid, it is unlikely that the amyloid deposits in s-IBM result simply from a non-speci¢c disturbance of lysosomal function. In our experience to date, in addition to s-and h-IBMs, the only other muscle disorder with intra-myo¢ber Congophilia is oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD). We found intra-¢ber Congophilia in all seven of our OPMD patients, and in the three French OPMD biopsies that we studied (50, and unpublished observations). Whether intra-myo¢ber Congophilia will be convincingly demonstrated in any other muscle disease remains to be seen.

b. Abnormal accumulation of b-amyloid protein (Ab) and two other epitopes of b-amyloid precursor protein (bAPP). Ab was discovered in, and ¢rst sequenced from, the amyloid ¢brils in cerebral blood vessels of Alzheimer's disease patients (51) and subsequently from senile plaques of Alzheimer's-disease brain (52,53). Ab is a peptide composed of 39 ^42 aminoacids; it is produced by proteolytic cleavage of the much larger bAPP (reviewed in 46).

bAPP, the product of a chromosome-21 gene, is considered to be a cell-surface glycoprotein. It contains a large extracellular N-terminal domain, a transmembrane Ab domain, and a short cytoplasmic C-terminal domain (54,55). In normal human muscle, bAPP, apparently in full-length because it contains C-and N-terminal and Ab epitopes, accumulates prominently only at the postsynaptic domain of the neuromuscular junction (NMJ) (56), suggesting that bAPP has an important normal function there.

Ab and bAPP have received considerable attention regarding the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. The abnormal accumulation of Ab in Alzheimer's disease brain has been proposed to result from abnormal proteolytic cleavage of bAPP to produce the amyloidogenic fragment Ab; however, overproduction of bAPP remains an additional, or alternative, possibility (reviewed in 46).

Myositis and its similarities to Alzheimer disease

Although pathologic accumulations of Ab and bAPP were previously considered to be con¢ned to the brain and its blood vessels, Ab and C-and Nterminal epitopes of bAPP are also abnormally accumulated in vacuolated muscle ¢bers of s-IBM patients (34,43,45,57,58).

By gold-immunoelectronmicroscopy, Ab is localized to 6 ^10 nm amyloid-like ¢brils, irregular clusters of nearly amorphous, dense structures, and poorly-de¢ned, loose, £occular material (34,43). Cand N-terminal epitopes of bAPP are localized to irregular clusters of nearly-amorphous, dense material and loose £occular material, but not to the 6 10 nm amyloid-like ¢brils, which contained Ab only (43). PHFs themselves never contain immunoreactivity of any of the bAPP epitopes (43). c. Overexpression of the bAPP gene in inclusion-body myositis vacuolated muscle ¢bers. The bAPP gene produces several alternatively-spliced transcripts (reviewed in 46). bAPP-695 messenger RNA (mRNA), which lacks the Kunitz-type protease inhibitor (KPI) epitope, is the predominant bAPP mRNA in normal and in Alzheimer brain, whereas mRNAs for bAPP transcripts, which contain the KPI epitope, predominate in peripheral tissues (and are also present in normal and Alzheimer brain) (reviewed in 46, 59).

s-IBM vacuolated muscle ¢bers have increased mRNA signal only for bAPP containing the KPI motif (60). In a¡ected muscle ¢bers, the increased bAPP mRNA co-localizes in the same foci as the abnormal accumulations of bAPP immunoreactivity (including the Ab epitope) (60).

In Alzheimer's disease (AD), it has been suggested that the KPI domain of bAPP a¡ects its proteolytic processing, leading to liberation of free Ab, which then aggregates into Congophilic b-pleated sheets composed of amyloid ¢brils (reviewed in 46,59,61). In IBM, perhaps in addition to the demonstrated increase of bAPP synthesis (60), a) there is abnormal bAPP processing, or b) simply, the excessivelysynthesized bAPP overloads the normal processing pathway, producing an unmanageable amount of otherwise-trivial Ab. It is of particular interest that in IBM, abnormal accumulation of bAPP and bAPP-mRNA seems to precede other abnormalities (41, and see below).

d. Abnormal accumulation of phosphorylated tau.

Tau is a protein belonging to the class of mammalian brain microtubule-associated proteins and is found primarily in neural tissue (reviewed in 62,63). Human brain tau is the product of a single gene, whose mRNA is alternatively spliced and whose proteins are variably phosphorylated to generate six isoforms (62,63), all of which are expressed in adult human brain. Some of the 16 exons are constitutitively expressed and some are under developmental regulation. Tau mRNAs have been found only in neurons (62,63). Phosphorylated tau is a major constituent of the AD intraneuronal and extracellular PHFs (64 ^67). All six isoforms of brain tau are abnormally phosphorylated in AD PHFs. It has been postulated that abnormal phosphorylation of tau causes signi¢cant structural changes, resulting in its altered electrophoretic mobility, molecular size, interaction with microtubules, and, possibly, its propensity to self-aggregate into PHFs (64 ^67).

In AD, it is not well understood how PHFs are assembled nor why they accumulate; hyperphosphor-Fig. 2. Electronmicroscopy of a sporadic-IBM muscle biopsy. (A,B) Characteristic paired-helical ¢laments seen on lower power (A) and higher power (B). (L) Cluster of 6 ^10 nm ¢laments. A|43 000; B|100 000; L|24 000. ylation or abnormal glycation of tau possibly are predisposing mechanisms (68,69).

Using highly speci¢c antibodies recognizing several epitopes of phosphorylated tau, we have demonstrated that vacuolated muscle ¢bers of s-IBM contain phosphorylated tau that is localized exclusively to PHFs (41,42). Therefore, it appears that, similarly to AD, phosphorylated tau participates in the formation of IBM-PHFs. Our studies showing phosphorylated tau in IBM muscle ¢bers provided the ¢rst demonstration of abnormally accumulated tau in diseased tissue other than brain. A comparison between AD-and IBM-PHFs is reviewed in (3).

e. Accumulation of Apolipoprotein E (ApoE). ApoE has recently been linked to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (70,71). ApoE is localized immunocytochemically in senile plaques and neuro¢brillary tangles (72); it binds to b-amyloid protein in vitro (73); and an increased frequency of its E4 allele is associated with earlier clinical onset of the sporadic and late-onset-familial forms of Alzheimer's disease (70,71).

ApoE is abnormally accumulated within the vacuoles of s-IBM muscle, where it is localized mainly to PHFs, and also to 6 ^10 nm ¢laments and amorphous material (74,75). Its light-microscopic localization is in the form of intracellular inclusions that closely co-localize with phosphorylated-tau, Ab, and ubiquitin (74,75).

Because ApoE-mRNA is not present in IBM vacuolated muscle ¢bers (75), we postulate that ApoE is transported from the circulation into the vacuolated muscle ¢bers thru their low-density-lipoprotein receptors. Because ApoE is known to bind to bpleated-sheet amyloid of various proteins (73) and to Ab (73), it is possible that after transport of ApoE into IBM vacuolated muscle-¢bers, it is captured there by both Ab and any b-pleated-sheet amyloid.

Even though one group reported increase of the ApoE 4-allele in s-IBM (76), the ApoE 4-allele is not preferentially increased in the IBM patients, according to a report from Great Britain (77) and our results regarding both s-and h-IBM (78).

f. Abnormal accumulation of Ubiquitin (Ub). Ub is a 76-amino-acid, highly-conserved polypeptide present in all eukaryotes. It is thought to regulate degradation of abnormal and short-lived-normal proteins by an ATP-dependent pathway (reviewed in 79 ^81). The two quite di¡erent proteolytic systems, the Ub system and the lysosomal-autophagic system, were recently found to be functionally related (79 81). Ub also plays a role in basic cellular processes, such as DNA repair and modi¢cation of cell surface receptors ( In 1991 we demonstrated that vacuolated muscle ¢bers of s-and h-IBM, and of oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy, contain strongly ubiquinated inclusions (83). Subsequently, positive ubiquitinated inclusions in IBM were con¢rmed by others (39,57,84). In normal human muscle ¢bers, Ub-immunoreactivity is present only at the post-synaptic region of neuromuscular junctions (85).

By immunoelectronmicroscopy, Ub in IBM was localized to PHFs, 6 ^10 nm amyloid-like ¢brils, £occular material, and amorphous structures; on the latter three, but not on PHFs, Ub co-localized with Ab (34,43,83).

In IBM, Ub is probably bound to post-translationally abnormally modi¢ed proteins, and possibly also to excessive short-lived normal proteins. It is not known whether ubiquitination in IBM relates to the lysosomal system or is independent of it. It has been shown that Ub can induce amyloidogenesis (82). Whether this propensity of Ub plays a role in the induction of amyloid deposits in IBM muscle ¢bers is certainly of interest.

Ubiquitination has been also suggested to play a role in immune responses, for example, in activation of the T-cell antigen-receptor (86). Whether this mechanism plays a role in s-IBM remains to be determined.

g. Abnormal accumulation of a 1 -antichymotrypsin (a 1 -ACT). a 1 -ACT is a speci¢c inhibitor of serine proteases and belongs to the serpin super-family (reviewed in 87). It forms stable complexes with chymotrypsin, cathepsin G, and mast-cell chymases (87). Even though the physiologic functions of a 1 -ACT are not well understood, it is considered a major acute-phase protein associated with in£ammatory episodes because its concentration in plasma greatly increases after surgery, burn injuries, and other acute events (87). Proposed functions of a 1 -ACT involve control of connective-tissue breakdown and cell-cell interactions, since it has been found to decrease proteoglycan and ¢bronectin and to inhibit activity of natural-killer T-cells (87).

Previously, abnormal accumulation of a 1 -ACT has been described in Alzheimer brain, where a 1 -ACT was localized in amyloid plaques that also contained Ab and ubiquitin (88,89). The pathogenic signi¢cance of a 1 -ACT in AD brain is not certain. Because of its ability to tightly associate with Ab and its pre-Myositis and its similarities to Alzheimer disease sence in Ab-containing pre-amyloid plaques, a 1 -ACT has been proposed to play a role in amyloid ¢bril formation (88).

Abnormal accumulation of a 1 -ACT has been demonstrated in vacuolated muscle ¢bers of s-IBM (90). As in AD brain, in IBM muscle a 1 -ACT immunoreactivity closely co-localizes with Ab (90), which demonstrates another similarity between IBM muscle and AD brain and suggests that the pathogenic mechanisms of both diseases may have commonalities.

h. Presenilin 1 (PS1). Most recently, PS1 has been also found accumulated in IBM abnormal muscle ¢bers (91). PS1 is a newly discovered protein encoded by a gene on chromosome-14, missense mutations of which lead to the most common and aggressive form of familial AD (reviewed in 92). Despite the fact that there are no mutations of the PS1 gene in sporadic AD, the same abnormal accumulations of PS1 occur in the brains of both sporadic and familial Alzheimer patients ^and in both, PS1 is immunolocalized to the same structures, namely neuro¢brillary tangles (containing 15 ^21 nm PHFs) and senile plaques (containing 6 ^10 nm ¢laments) (92 ^95), suggesting that PS1 in AD plays a role in a cerebral pathogenic cascade common to both sporadic and familial forms of AD. The same may also be true in the IBMs, because in sporadic and hereditary forms, PS1 accumulates on the same structures, namely 15 ^21 nm PHFs and 6 ^10 nm ¢laments (44). Because the h-IBM patients studied were ones genetically linked to chromosome 9p1-q1, they presumably did not have the chromosome-14 PS1 genetic abnormality (44).

i. Abnormal accumulation of cellular prion protein (PrP c ) and prion-mRNA (PrP c -mRNA). A protein accumulated in s-IBM muscle, but not accumulated in AD brain is PrP c (96).

PrP c is a normal 33 ^37 kD brain constituent containing 253 ^254 aminoacids. It is considered to be the precursor of the scrapie agent, namely prion protein scrapie, (PrP sc ) (reviewed in 97). Human PrP c is encoded by a single gene, consisting of two exons and one intron, on the short arm of chromosome 20 (97). The normal functions of PrP c are uncertain. It is considered to be on the outer surface of the cell membrane, with a hypothesized role in cell-cell recognition and/or communication (97). In normal human muscle biopsies, PrP c and its mRNA has been localized at the postsynaptic domain of NMJs (98), and in muscle macrophages (99).

PrP sc is a 33 ^37 kD isoform of PrP c that is resistant to proteinase-K digestion (note that all b-pleated sheet amyloids, composed of any type of protein, are proteinase-K resistant, but probably not all protease-K-resistant PrP sc is in the form of Congophilic amyloid detectable by light-microscopy). PrP sc is thought to be a post-translationally changed PrP c . It is found only in brains of scrapie-infected animals and in patients with sporadic kuru (97), sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), hereditary Gerstmann-StrÌussler-Scheinker syndrome (GSS), and hereditary fatal familial insomnia (97). PrP c and PrP sc are encoded by the same gene. The amount of the corresponding PrP c -mRNA is the same in normal and scrapie-infected brain (97) (whereas PrP c -mRNA is increased in s-IBM muscle ¢bers, see below). Proteinase-K applied to PrP sc from scrapie-infected brain generates a 27 ^30 kD digestion-resistant fragment called PrP 27 ^30, whereas the PrP c of normal brain is completely digested by proteinase-K (97). Therefore, PrP 27 ^30, encoded by a normal cellular gene, is considered to be the disease-characteristic fraction of scrapie brain (97).

Within s-IBM muscle ¢bers, in addition to the PrP immunoreactive inclusions (96) there is increased PrP c -mRNA (100).

The increased PrP c -mRNA in IBM vacuolated muscle ¢bers identi¢es the ¢rst (to our knowledge) human disease manifesting increased PrP c -mRNA. Therefore, PrP abnormally accumulated in IBM muscle ¢bers probably results, at least partly, from locally increased transcription of PrP c .

Previously, the only abnormal human tissue in which PrP and its mRNA have been studied were brains of patients with prion diseases; they did not have increased PrP c mRNA, nor did brains of scrapie-infected animals (97). Therefore, our ¢ndings in IBM muscle contrast with those of prion brain diseases.

Because both PrP c and bAPP mRNAs can, under certain circumstances, be regulated by the same factor, it is possible that in IBM there might be a pathological up-regulation of another, yet-unidenti¢ed gene ^for example, a gene normally silent in mature muscle ¢bers, through its product acting directly or indirectly as a transcription-factor, may upregulate PrP c , bAPP, and other genes normally expressed in brain and in mature muscle-¢bers post-synaptically at neuromuscular junctions (NMJs) (60,100), but not elsewhere in mature muscle ¢bers. It is also possible that in IBM, there is a co-existing defect in processing (e.g., abnormal glycation) or disposal of prion, and perhaps of some of the other accumulated proteins, and/or abnormal polymerization/ binding/precipitation of them (which might or might not be simply a consequence of supply-side exuberance).

Table II illustrates similarities and di¡erences between Alzheimer-disease brain and IBM muscle.

V. Askanas and W. King Engel

Possible pathogenic mechanism(s) of s-IBM

In s-IBM, the etiology and details of the pathogenic cascade are not known. Below are described various considerations related to the pathogenesis of IBM. a) Do in£ammation and autoimmunity play a role in IBM pathogenesis? . Mononuclear-cell in£ammation is one of the components of s-IBM pathology. Degrees of in£ammation vary from abundant in the early stages to little or none in the mid and later stages of disease. The types of mononuclear in£ammatory cells are similar to those in polymyositis (PM), being mainly CD8 z cytotoxic T-cells and macrophages (reviewed in 3, 101 ^104). The CD8 z T-cells invade rather-intact, but minimally-abnormal, muscle ¢bers, which are pathologically expressing MHC-I (101 ^104). In both s-IBM and PM there is a predominance of CD45 RO z memory Tcells in endomysial in¢ltrates (105). Also similarly to PM, the population of myoinvasive T-cells in s-IBM was shown to be clonally restricted, while the interstitial T-cells were clonally diverse (106,107). The cause of the mononuclear-cell in£ammation in s-IBM is not known. Even though it has been recently reported that the type of T-cell response suggests it is an antigen-induced (108), in neither polymyositis nor s-IBM is the putative antigen(s?) known. Considerations include a yet-unidenti¢ed viral antigen or an auto-antigen (7,11). Other considerations are a superantigen phenomenon, molecular mimicry, and a possible role of HERVs [human endogenous retroviruses (11)].

Expression of Fas in muscle ¢bers and of Fas and Fas-ligand in in¢ltrating mononuclear cells was demonstrated in both s-IBM and PM (109,110). Even though an increase of Fas usually renders a cell susceptible to apoptosis (reviewed in 109), apoptosis is not present in muscle ¢bers of either s-IBM or polymyositis (109 ^112). Fas-positive muscle ¢bers in both s-IBM and polymyositis were also expressing Bcl-2, an apoptosis-inhibiting protein (109). Presently unknown is whether a) Bcl-2 has a protective in£uence, or b) expression of Fas in s-IBM and PM muscle ¢bers does not susceptibilize them to apoptosis. It has recently been suggested that muscle ¢bers might be relatively resistant to T-cell induced injury (109).

Various cytokines and cell-adhesion molecules have been immunostained in muscle biopsies of s-IBM, PM, and dermatomyositis (113 ^116) ^the results have di¡ered depending on the method of staining, tissue preparation, and antibodies used. Exogenous cytokines (e.g. from mononuclear in£ammatory cells), as well as intracellular viruses, can induce the expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class-I molecules and of cell-adhesion molecules (CAMs), both of which are upregu-lated in s-IBM and PM muscle ¢bers (reviewed in 101 ^104). Our recent studies (117,Haginoya et al., to be published) demonstrated within s-IBM vacuolated muscle ¢bers abnormal accumulations of interleukins 1a, 1b, and 6, which by immunoelectronmicroscopy were localized to clusters to pairedhelical ¢laments.

Previously, in patients with dermatomyositis, MAC has been immunolocalized to the intramuscular microvasculative (arterioles and capillaries) and to necrotic muscle ¢bers (118).

Recently, C5b9 complement membrane attack complex (MAC) was immunolocalized to the sarcolemma of non-necrotic muscle ¢bers in approximately 50% of patients with fascioscapulohumeral dystrophy, limb-girdle muscular dystrophies and merosinpositive congenital muscular dystrophy, but not in s-IBM, polymyositis, dermatomyositis, or Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies (119). The signi¢cance of MAC being immunodetectable at the sarcolemma in some forms of hereditary muscular dystrophies is not known because it is absent at non-necrotic muscle-¢ber sarcolemma in s-IBM, PM, and dermatomyositis ^the authors suggested that antibody-dependent complement-mediated muscle-¢ber injury of the sarcolemma does not play a role in the pathogenesis of these in£ammatory myopathies (119). However, that group does consider that T-cell-mediated myocytotoxicity has major pathologic signi¢cance in the in£ammatory myopathies (120).

Despite the in£ammatory components in s-IBM and PM being virtually identical, those syndromes have di¡erent responses to immunosuppression treatment and di¡erent progression of disease. Moreover, the speci¢c vacuolar degeneration of muscle ¢bers occurs only in s-IBM. It is not part of the PM muscle-¢ber phenotype, but it does occur in h-IBM, which lacks an in£ammatory component. Therefore, we propose that other factors detailed below are more important than in£ammation in the pathogenesis of s-IBM and as the cause of the chronic progressive weakness.

b) Muscle-¢ber aging as an important factor possibly contributing to the development of s-IBM. s-IBM becomes clinically manifest after age 50. The etiologic factor(s?) is not known. We postulate that in s-IBM there are three overlapping aspects of muscle-¢ber destruction: a) an attack on muscle ¢bers by cytotoxic T-lymphocytes, which is prominent early during involvement of a given muscle and usually less evident in later stages; b) vacuolar degeneration, somewhat less in early stages compared to great involvement in mid and later stages; and c) muscle-¢ber atrophy, which usually resembles denervation atrophy, present at all stages and more prominent in later stages. Although the composition of the mononuclear-cell in¢ltrates and other aspects of the in£ammatory reaction are similar to those in ordinary PM (see above), in contrast to PM, s-IBM patients as a group respond poorly to anti-dysimmune treatment. This may be because of unresponsiveness of non-in£ammatory mechanisms causing the vacuolar degeneration and muscle-¢ber atrophy, which we propose to be more important in producing the progressive clinical weakness. Patients over age 50 with what could be considered ``pure PM'' are rare; virtually all of the older patients with mononuclear-cell in£ammation in muscle biopsies had features of s-IBM. We raised the possibility that the milieu of the aged muscle ¢ber might: a) modify the provocation of and response to in£ammation; b) promote development of IBM-characteristic progressive vacuolar degeneration (perhaps independent of in£ammation); and c) be preferentially susceptible to a putative virus causing s-IBM (121).

We further postulate that due to the aged muscle-¢ber cellular milieu, there are diminished cellular defense mechanisms caused by either: a) overexpression of yet-unknown genes encoding putatively toxic cellular factors, or b) underexpression of ``youthful'' genes encoding putatively bene¢cial cellular factors. These mechanisms may lead to muscle-¢ber vacuolar-degeneration, atrophy and cellular death.

In accord with the aging concept is the possibility that in s-IBM viral DNA (e.g. from a i) horizontallytransmitted exogenous infection or ii) verticallytransmitted genomic endogenous retrovirus), dormant for years, may start to be transcribed in an aged cellular milieu due to aging-related upregulation of a transcription-activating factor or downregulation of a transcription-inhibitor. In principle, this would be analogous to the phenomenon of HTLV-1 virus acquired in infancy through mother's milk but not becoming clinically pathogenic until the 5 th -7 th decade of life. We have proposed that a virus causes s-IBM, including the mitochondrial abnormalities, oxi- dative-stress manifestations, protein accumulations, and altered transcriptions (3,4,6,7). For most s-IBM patients, a putative virus has not been found, although two of our patients had typical s-IBM and HTLV-1 (see above), as have rare other patients (8,11). These HTLV-1 patients enhance the suspicion of a viral cause in other s-IBM patients.

c) Oxidative stress as a possible factor in the pathogenic cascade of IBM. There is increasing evidence that free-radical toxicity may participate in IBM pathogenesis. Superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1) and SOD1-mRNA were increased within vacuolated muscle ¢bers (VMFs) of s-and h-IBM (reviewed in 3) ^this might be re£ecting an attempted protective response to pathologically-increased superoxide. Superoxide leads to free-radical toxicity. It can rapidly combine with NO to form very-toxic peroxynitrite, which can then pathologically nitrate tyrosine groups on proteins to form nitrotyrosine, impairing protein functions (reviewed in 123).

Abnormally accumulated in vacuolated muscle ¢bers of s-IBM are neuronal (n) and inducible (i) forms of nitric oxide synthase (NOS), which produce NO, leading to nitrotyrosine, as above (124,125). The nitrotyrosine demonstrated in s-IBM VMFs is indicative of NO-induced oxidative stress (123). To our knowledge, s-IBM was the ¢rst muscle disease in which NO-induced oxidative stress has been demonstrated. An additional indicator of oxidative stress in s-IBM is accumulation in vacuolated ¢bers of malondialdehyde, a product of lipid peroxidation (126).

The nuclear factorkB (NF-kB) is pathologically accumulated on cytoplasmic PHFs in s-IBM ¢bers (127), and this could have resulted from intracellular oxidative stress. In s-IBM, reasons for the demonstrated increase of NOS's, nitrotyrosine, and abnormal lipid peroxidation, and the inferred increase of superoxide, are not known. Various muscle-¢ber proteins are abnormally accumulated in IBM muscle ¢bers, but the role each plays in the pathogenic cascade is not understood. It is also not known: a) whether one of the proteins initiates the cascade to cause accumulation of other proteins, which then produce oxidative stress; or b) whether the oxidative stress is an early event that subsequently induces various protein abnormalities. In s-IBM, the known and yet-unknown mitochondrial abnormalities, such as the respiratory-chain dysfunctions (30 ^33), could augment generation of reactive oxygen species, which then produce the oxidative stress.

We have postulated that accumulation of bAPP and/or Ab within muscle ¢bers is an early step in the pathogenic cascade common to all forms of IBM (3,121). b-amyloid protein (Ab) is known to induce oxi-dative stress in a variety of cells (reviewed in 128). Accordingly, in IBM overproduction of bAPP may cause cellular disturbances leading to increased generation of free radicals, resulting in oxidative stress. Fig. 3 illustrates our hypothetical model of this pathogenic aspect. In accord with this hypothesis is our recent demonstration that bAPP overexpression, produced by bAPP gene-transfer into cultured normal human muscle ¢bers, induced increased SOD1 and SOD1-mRNA (reviewed in 3), as well as several other aspects of the IBM phenotype (see below).

Therefore, oxidative stress is suspected to be an important contributory mechanism in IBM pathogenesis. If this is true, a potential therapeutic avenue for the IBMs would be reduction of free radicals or prevention of their formation within a¡ected muscle ¢bers. d) Possible relevance of morphochemical similarities between IBM muscle and Alzheimer-disease (AD) brain, and how a self-perpetuating cascade of muscle ¢ber destruction might occur. Because the same proteins accumulate within IBM muscle ¢bers as accumulate in the brain of sporadic and hereditary forms of AD, the muscle and the brain diseases might share certain pathogenic steps ^and knowledge of one disease might help elucidate the other. Cellular aging and evidence of oxidative stress are associated with the ADs and IBM. The IBMs and the ADs (including sporadic and hereditary forms of both groups) are both multifactorial and polygenetic. The respective cascades of events leading to the speci¢c form of IBM AD-like muscle-¢ber degeneration and the similar speci¢c features of AD brains are not understood. Within both the IBM and the AD categories, the pathologic phenotypes of sporadic and hereditary forms are very similar, despite di¡erent direct causes being mainly non-genetic versus mainly genetic. Therefore, in each disease category it has been proposed, by ourselves in the IBMs (121,129) and by others in the ADs (130,131), that di¡erent etiologies, including di¡erent genetic defects in the hereditary forms, lead to the same upstream step which then promotes the downstream ¢nal common pathogenic cascade of events resulting in the speci¢c cellular deterioration. e) Overexpression of the bAPP gene may be an early step in the pathogenic cascade common to s-IBM and h-IBM. We have previously proposed that increased expression of several genes is at least one component underlying the demonstrated increase of the respective IBM-characteristic proteins (reviewed in 3, 7). It is possible that one gene-product (protein) might start a detrimental cascade by acting, directly or indirectly, as a transcription factor activating genes for some of the other ``IBM-proteins'' (3,7). Because accumulation of bAPP and its mRNA occurs very early in the disease process and appears to precede other abnormalities including congophilia (3,4,34,41,43), we have postulated that accumulation of bAPP and/or Ab within muscle ¢bers is an early step in the pathogenic cascade common to all forms of sand h-IBM (Figs 3, 3, 7, and above). Therefore, we have begun to study this putative pathogenesis by determining whether abnormally accumulated bAPP in IBM muscle can be at least partially responsible for other aspects of the IBM phenotype.

To approach this question, we transferred the bAPP-751 gene, using adenovirus vector, into cultured normal human muscle ¢bers (132,133). Like s-IBM biopsied muscle ¢bers, the bAPP-overexpressing cultured muscle ¢bers were vacuolated and had patches of Congophilic amyloid. Electronmicroscopy revealed 15 ^21 nm diameter nuclear tubulo¢laments, 6 ^10 nm diameter cytoplasmic ¢laments, and lysosomal inclusions (133). These studies provided the novel demonstration that overexpression of the bAPP gene in muscle can produce several aspects of the IBM cellular phenotype. (These bAPP-overexpressing muscle ¢bers also secreted a large amount of Ab1 ^40 and Ab1 ^42 into the extracellular medium [Xie, McFerrin, Engel, Selkoe and Askanas, preliminary studies, 1997].) bAPP-overexpressing cultured muscle ¢bers also had abnormal mitochondria, which contained para-crystalline inclusions by electronmicroscopy and were cytochrome-c-oxidase (COX) negative histochemically (132). The cause of mitochondrial abnormalities in IBM muscle is not known. By demonstrating that bAPP-gene transfer causes decreased COX activity and structurally-abnormal mitochondria, our data suggest that overexpressed bAPP: a) may play a key role in the induction of those abnormalities in IBM, b) provide an excellent experimental model for further molecular studies.

If bAPP-overexpression activates, directly or indirectly, transcription of certain genes, it might activate genes of transcription factors known to be increased in the IBMs, such as NF-kB (127), which in turn can increase transcription of bAPP to produce a selfperputating mechanism.

Our recent studies demonstrated that in tissue culture, bAPP-overexpressing muscle ¢bers do not become properly innervated, suggesting that this mechanism may be responsible for denervation present in the IBM muscle biopsies (134) ^if so, it would be a mechanism of ``myogenous deinnervation'' (134). f) Hypothesized ``junctionalization'' of nonjunctional regions of muscle ¢bers in the IBMs. Most of the accumulated ``IBM proteins'' and the increased ``IBM-mRNAs'' are, in normal mature muscle ¢bers, found only at the post-synaptic region of the neuromuscular junction ^for example, bAPP, prion, 

SOD1

, n-and i-NOS, ubiquitin, a 1 -antichymotrypsin, apolipoprotein E, and the mRNAs of bAPP and prion (tau is not accumulated at the normal NMJ, reviewed in [135]). The normal phenomenon of protein and mRNA accumulation at the NMJ we have termed ``junctionalization'' (3,4,7,135,illustrated in Fig 4). It is induced by the contacting motor neuron axonal tip and presumably is governed, at least partially, by enhanced expression within the junctional (subsynaptic) myonuclei of the genes of those ``junctional proteins''. A ``junctionalizing master-gene'' and its transcription-factor have been proposed as a controller of the junctional-protein genes. During normal NMJ development there is concurrent downregulation of those junctional-protein genes in the nonjunctional nuclei located throughout the muscle ¢ber other than at the NMJ. Because most of the proteins (except tau) that accumulate in the IBMs in the form of inclusions scattered non-junctionally throughout the abnormal muscle ¢bers are normal junctional proteins, we proposed that in s-and h-IBM there is ``junctionalization'' of extrajunctional regions of the muscle ¢bers associated with re-activated expression of junction-protein genes in the previously nonjunctional nuclei. This junctionalization could possibly be induced, directly or indirectly, by i) protein factors from a putative virus in s-IBM, and ii) the protein product of a mutated gene(s) in h-IBM ^both perhaps abetted by reactive oxygen species and aged-milieu factors.

Fig. 4. Hypothetical ``junctionalization'' mechanism (ectopic expression of junctional proteins) in IBM. In nonjunctional nuclei of IBM, there is re-activation of genes of junctional proteins or downregulation of a gene (genes?) of junctional-protein suppression-factor (by virus?, abnormal aging?, genetic factors?, others?).

Copyright of Scandinavian Journal of Rheumatology is the property of Taylor & Francis Ltd and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

Acknowledgements

Studies described in this review were supported in part by the National Institutes of Health, Muscular Dystrophy Association, and Alzheimer Foundation, and the Sheldon Katz, Ron Stever and Helen Lewis Research Funds. We thank our research-team col-leagues R. B. Alvarez, J. McFerrin, E. Sarkozi, M. Mirabella, C.-C. Yang, M. Bilak, K. Haginoya, A. Broccolini, S. Baque¨, and P. Serdaroglu, who participated in various studies described. Assistance in photographic processing by M. Baburyan and preparation of the manuscript by L. Martinez is appreciated. We also thank our Clinical Fellows who, over the past several years, have participated in the care of our patients. We are grateful to our physician colleagues who graciously referred their patients. We are especially grateful to our patients themselves, without whom these studies would not have been possible and for whose ultimate bene¢t these studies aspire.

Fig. 1 .1Fig. 1. Light-microscopy of sporadic-IBM muscle biopsies. (A-C) Engel-Gomori trichrome staining illustrating vacuolated muscle ¢bers and various degrees of in£ammation (A,B), or no in£ammation (C). (D) Two abnormal muscle ¢bers with characteristic squiggly immunoreactive inclusions with SMI-31 antibody. (E,F) Congo-red staining visualized through Texas-red ¢lters and epi£uorescence illumination shows squiggly (E) and dotty (F) amyloid deposits in the vacuolated muscle ¢bers. A-C|600; D-F|1500.

Fig. 3 .3Fig. 3. Hypothetical Model of IBM pathogenesis. Genetic defects in h-IBM and various factors (including a putative virus) in s-IBM lead to presently unknown mechanisms (``?'' box in diagram). These upregulate bAPP-transcription resulting in bAPP Overexpression. In the milieu of ``Aging Muscle'' of s-IBM or of ``Adult Muscle'' of h-IBM, overexpression producing excessive bAPP (the whole molecule or its Ab fragment) leads to ``Oxidative Stress'' with increased Free Radicals, which contribute to producing abnormalities demonstrated as IBM Muscle-Fiber Abnormalities. Those abnormalities can be considered either Directly Associated with Oxidative Stress or Possibly Caused by Oxidative Stress. Perhaps some of the former contribute to producing (directly or indirectly) some of the latter. [*~present in virtually all s-IBM patients and in the older h-IBM patients; **~both mRNA and protein.].

Table I .IPathologic phenotype of sporadic inclusion-body myositis (S-IBM).Vacuolated muscle ¢bers (VMFs)zIn£ammationzCongo-red positivity within VMFszRagged-red ¢berszCytochrome-c-oxidase-negative muscle-¢berszCytoplasmic paired-helical ¢laments, 15 ^21 nmzdiameterNuclear paired helical ¢laments, 15 ^21 nm diameterzClusters of cytoplasmic 6 ^10 nm ¢laments,ztightly or loosely packedVarious mitochondrial abnormalities, includingzenlargement, paracrystalline inclusions, disorganizedcristae, and ``mushy'' matrix

79 ^81). Ub is of current interest in relation to its proposed role in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders. Ub is a component of neuro¢brillary tangles and senile plaques in Alzheimer-disease brain, Lewy bodies in Parkinson disease (reviewed in 82), and abnormal inclusions in lower motor neurons of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (reviewed in 82).

Table II .IIPathologic similarities and di¡erences between IBM muscle and Alzheimer Disease (AD) brain.Cellular phenotypeIBM,AD,in muscle ¢bersin brainCongophilia, associatedSmall ``plaquettes,''Large plaques,with Amyloid-beta (A b) Ab in ¢laments, diameter 1intra-cellular 6 ^10 nmextra-cellular 6 ^8 nmOther bAPP epitopes, accumulatedYesYes751-bAPP-mRNA, increasedYesYes (disputed)Presenilin 1, accumulatedYesYesPaired-helical ¢laments (PHFs)Yes, in bundlesYes, in neuro¢brillary tanglesPHFs in bundles, contain:. Phosphorylated tauYesYes. Ubiquitin . Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) 2Yes YesYes Yes. Presenilin 1YesYes. HO-1YesYes. Nitrotyrosine . Malondialdehyde 3Yes YesYes YesApoE-mRNA, increasedNoNo, in neuronsYes, in astrocytesa 1 -Antichymotrypsin (a 1 -ACT), accumulatedYesYesa 1 -ACT-mRNA, increasedNoNo, in neuronsYes, in astrocytesSOD1, accumulatedYesYesSOD1-mRNA, increasedYes?HO-1, accumulatedYesYesHO1-mRNA, increased?YesNitrotyrosine, accumulatedYesYesnNOS, accumulatedYes?iNOS, accumulatedYes?Mitochondrial abnormalities, including Cytochrome Oxidase de¢ciency 4YesYesNon-Alzheimer accumulations:. Prion (normal cellular type?)YesNo. Prion-mRNA (normal cellular type)YesNo

