Methionine homozygosity at prion gene codon 129 may predispose to sporadic inclusion-body myositis

released by neutrophils, macrophages, epithelial cells of skin, uterus, and kidney, placenta, and even Sertoli cells, during bacterial infection, they could accumulate in tissues and kill oocytes and preimplantation embryos. Endogenous peptide antibiotics can work in vivo at a concentration of 6 mg/mL. 5 It is intriguing to speculate that some idiopathic infertilities may be due to peptide antibiotics and that, apart from adaptive immunity, innate defence may be involved in damages to oocytes and preimplantation embryos.

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM) is the most common progressive muscle disorder in patients older than 55. It is characterised by a slowly worsening weakness of affected muscles. Muscle biopsy specimens show an inflammatory myopathy with intracellular amyloid deposits. Prion protein has been identified as one of several components of these inclusions. 1 The prion protein, is encoded by the prion (PRNP) gene. Homozygosity for methionine or valine at codon 129 of the PRNP gene predisposes to sporadic and iatrogenic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. [2][3][4] We investigated 22 patients with s-IBM and 57 controls without neurological disease from the Munich area. A muscle biopsy was necessary for diagnosis of s-IBM, made on the basis of clinical and histological criteria for definite s-IBM. 1 Genomic DNA was extracted with standard techniques. We used PCR to amplify a 338 bp fragment of the PRNP gene and codon 129 polymorphism was studied by digestion of the PCR product with restriction endonucleases NspI and MaeII. 2 14 (64%) of 22 patients with s-IBM were homozygous for methionine at codon 129, seven (32%) patients were valine/methionine heterozygotes, and one (5%) patient was homozygous for valine. In the control group, 23 (40%) were homozygous for methionine, 29 (51%) were valine/mathionine heterozygotes, and five (9%) were homozygous for valine; a distribution comparable to those reported from the three different Western European countries with 156 (39%), 198 (50%), and 44 (11%), respectively. [2][3][4][5] Differences in frequencies were tested by the 2 test. In the group with s-IBM, excess methionine homozygosity was significant (p=0•023).

In our study, methionine homozygosity at codon 129 is more prevalent in s-IBM, compared with controls. This finding is notable because it has been shown that prion protein accumulates in muscle fibres of patients with s-IBM 1 and overexpression of the prion gene in transgenic mice leads to a degenerative muscle disorder. 5 To our knowledge this is the first report on a possible linkage between a genetic risk mediated by the PNRP gene and a disease outside the brain.  Codon 129 zygosity in s-IBM and controls high probability. In these two students, the FTND score was 4 (low dependence).

In the first two students CO concentrations after the first vegetable-based cigarette rose from 15 ppm to 21 ppm and from 14 ppm to 26 ppm, respectively. After the second vegetable-based cigarette, the concentrations rose from 21 ppm to 28 ppm and from 26 ppm to 37 ppm, respectively.

In the second model, increase in CO concentrations and the course of the curve over 1 h were assessed in three lowdependency students. CO concentrations rose from 9 ppm to 24 ppm, 14 ppm to 19 ppm, and 7 ppm to 16 ppm, respectively. Within 1 h, an expected physiological decrease in CO was registered.

Because of our findings of CO exposure, we ended the study early to prevent adverse health effects in the volunteers.

Our data showed that smoking these vegetable-based cigarettes led to a similar degree of exposure to CO as smoking tobacco cigarettes, and may exceed the latter. Thus, this product is a potential hazard to health. Current treatment of nicotine dependence consists of a combination of nicotine substitution and behavioural therapy or psychological procedures without medication. 2,3 Further development of these procedures is under way. 4 Moreover,

A harmful aid to stopping smoking

Ernest Groman, Gerda Bernhard, Doris Blauensteiner, Ursula Kunze A vegetable-based cigarette (Arkopharma, France) was being offered in Austrian pharmacies and in other countries as an aid to help smokers stop smoking. The following information was provided on the pack: "Vegetable-based cigarettes, no tobacco, no nicotine, helps to quit smoking . . .".

These vegetable-based cigarettes are consumed in the same way as ordinary cigarettes. Initial studies showed that the process of combustion may have produced toxic substances and that the combustion of organic material might also produce carcinogenic substances. It was not known whether these cigarettes were registered as a drug or whether a different classification was being used.

Several queries were raised by consumers and the product received media coverage. A closer examination of the product seemed necessary. Therefore, we decided to measure the carbon monoxide (CO) exposure resulting from the consumption of these cigarettes.

CO concentrations in expired air were measured in five male students who volunteered to participate in the study. To enter the study, volunteers were required to have no history of disease and had to have no desire to stop smoking cigarettes.

Carbon monoxide concentrations were measured with the Bedfont EC50 MICRO carbon monoxide monitor. Individuals with CO values of 11-21 parts per million (ppm) were termed mild smokers, whereas those with CO values of more than 21 ppm were defined as heavy smokers. We defined tobacco and nicotine dependence according to the Vienna Standard Protocol. 1 We first measured baseline CO concentrations in all individuals. We used two design models: in the first model, concentrations after a first and second vegetable cigarette were measured. In the second model, we assessed the course of CO concentration over 1 h after consumption of one cigarette was registered.

In the first model, the nicotine dependence of two men was determined from the Fagerström test for nicotine dependence (FTND). This paper and pencil test, based on the Fagerström tolerance questionnaire is an easy indicator of nicotine dependence and degree of dependence with 

We thank R Koch, Institute for Medical Biometrics and Informatics, University of Technology Dresden, for statistical analysis, D E Pongratz, Friedrich Baur Institut, Munich, for histological diagnosis of s-IBM, and N Lenz for technical assistance.

CDetails of the experimental procedures used for DNA isolation, PCR amplification, are available from the authors, on request. THE LANCET • Vol 353 • February 6Duration of treatment (min) Response of oocytes and preimplantation embryos to magainin A: oocytes, B: 1-cell, C: 2-cell embryos treated with 250 g/mL magainin. Open circles represent percentage of viable cells cultivated in M2 medium supplied with 0•4% polyvinylpyrrolidone. Filled circles represent percentage of viable cells cultivated in M2 medium supplied with 0•4% bovine serum albumin. Each point represents mean of 4-9 experiments involving 2523 cells.

5 CO5concentrations in model 1 (top) and model 2 (bottom)

