Ribosomal frameshifting in the  CCR5  mRNA is regulated by miRNAs and the NMD pathway

Abstract

Programmed −1 ribosomal frameshift (−1 PRF) signals redirect translating ribosomes to slip back one base on messenger RNAs. Although well characterized in viruses, how these elements may regulate cellular gene expression is not understood. Here we describe a −1 PRF signal in the human mRNA encoding CCR5, the HIV-1 co-receptor. CCR5 mRNA-mediated −1 PRF is directed by an mRNA pseudoknot, and is stimulated by at least two microRNAs. Mapping the mRNA–miRNA interaction suggests that formation of a triplex RNA structure stimulates −1 PRF. A −1 PRF event on the CCR5 mRNA directs translating ribosomes to a premature termination codon, destabilizing it through the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay pathway. At least one additional mRNA decay pathway is also involved. Functional −1 PRF signals that seem to be regulated by miRNAs are also demonstrated in mRNAs encoding six other cytokine receptors, suggesting a novel mode through which immune responses may be fine-tuned in mammalian cells.

Supplementary information

The online version of this article (doi:10.1038/nature13429) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

Abstract

Programmed −1 ribosomal frameshifting (−1 PRF) is a process by which a signal in a messenger RNA causes a translating ribosome to shift by one nucleotide, thus changing the reading frame; here −1 PRF in the mRNA for the co-receptor for HIV-1, CCR5, is stimulated by two microRNAs and leads to degradation of the transcript by nonsense-mediated decay and at least one other decay pathway.

Supplementary information

The online version of this article (doi:10.1038/nature13429) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

Ribosomal frameshift tunes the immune response

This paper reports the identification of an operational programmed minus one ribosomal frameshift (−1 PRF) signal that shifts elongating ribosomes into a premature termination codon in the human CCR5 mRNA, suggesting that it may destabilize the CCR5 mRNA through the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay pathway. PRF events, in which a signal in an mRNA causes a translating ribosome to shift by one nucleotide, thereby changing the reading frame, have been widely studied in viruses but less is known about how they act in mammalian cells. In the experiments described here, CCR5-mediated −1 PRF is enhanced by two microRNAs, one of which binds the −1 PRF signal directly and results in its structural reorganization. Other cytokine receptors also exhibit the potential for miRNA-regulated −1 PRF. These findings demonstrate a novel mechanism for fine-tuning immune responses in mammalian cells.

Supplementary information

The online version of this article (doi:10.1038/nature13429) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

Main

Viral programmed ribosomal frameshift events typically produce carboxy-terminally extended fusion proteins. However, computational analyses predict that >95% of −1 PRF events on cellular mRNAs direct ribosomes to premature termination codons (PTC), suggesting that −1 PRF may be used by cells to regulate gene expression by destabilizing mRNAs through the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) pathway1. Whereas a role for −1 PRF has been shown in yeast2,3, it has not been tested in higher eukaryotes so far. In yeast, mutants and drugs that globally affect −1 PRF generally promote deleterious phenotypes4, and global dysregulation of −1 PRF may contribute to human disease3,5,6,7. How sequence-specific regulation of −1 PRF might be achieved has been the central unanswered question in the field.

A −1 PRF signal in the CCR5 receptor mRNA

CCR5 is a cytokine receptor which is exploited by HIV-1 as a co-receptor for entry into CD4+ T-cells8. A strong candidate −1 PRF signal beginning at nucleotide 407 in the human CCR5 mRNA was identified computationally9. This sequence is >99% conserved among the great apes and is highly conserved among the higher primates (Extended Data Fig. 1). Using dual luciferase reporters (Extended Data Fig. 2a), the CCR5 sequence promoted 9–11% −1 PRF in HeLa (Fig. 1a) and 4.5–6.3% in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) or Vero cells (Extended Data Fig. 2b). Mutagenesis of the slippery site from UUUAAAA to GCGCGCG reduced −1 PRF to <1% (Fig. 1a). Introduction of an in-frame termination codon (PTC control) 5′ of the CCR5-derived sequence, or placing the firefly luciferase reporter out of frame with respect to Renilla reduced −1 PRF levels by more than two orders of magnitude (Fig. 1a), ruling out the possible presence of either a splicing donor site or an internal ribosome entry signal (IRES). An in vitro translation assay revealed a peptide consistent with a CCR5 −1 PRF event at levels comparable to that promoted by the HIV-1 −1 PRF signal (Fig. 1b). Liquid chromatography dual mass spectroscopic analysis of an affinity purified CCR5–β-gal fusion protein (Extended Data Fig. 2c) unambiguously identified the predicted −1 frameshift peptide harbouring the junction between the 0− and −1 frame encoded CCR5 sequence (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 2d). Analysis of published ribosome profiling data from human cells10 revealed a sizable fraction of ribosomes paused at the CCR5 −1 PRF signal, 9/59 (∼15%) of which were shifted into the −1 reading frame (Fig. 1d). These four lines of inquiry demonstrate that this sequence in the human CCR5 mRNA promotes efficient −1 PRF.

Structural analysis

Computational analyses predicted the presence of two nearly equivalent downstream mRNA pseudoknots or a tandem stem-loop structure immediately 3′ of the slippery site (Extended Data Fig. 3a). Analyses of chemical modification assays of a CCR5 runoff transcript (Extended Data Fig. 3b, c) were consistent with the presence of a two-stemmed mRNA pseudoknot (Fig. 2). Whereas the slippery site distal region of Stem 1 is stable, the proximal region is conformationally dynamic, consistent with single-molecule optical trap experiments revealing a complex network of folding pathways for this element11. The weak slippery site proximal half of stem 1 coupled with the internal bulge is reminiscent of the HIV-1 −1 PRF signal solution structure12 and is consistent with the emerging view of conformational complexity as a critical feature of recoding pseudoknots13,14. Stem 2 contains four semi-helical segments (labelled a, b, d, e in Fig. 2a), plus a small segment in the middle (c), all separated by unpaired bases. The unpaired bases may allow the entire structure to bend, enabling U23 to bridge the gap between C22 and U24. The ‘best fit’ conformer diagrammed in Fig. 2a was used as the basis for molecular-dynamics-based simulation of the CCR5 −1 PRF stimulatory mRNA structure (Fig. 2b, Extended Data Fig. 3d, e). The root mean squared deviation (r.m.s.d.) average structure was calculated for the last 12 ns of an 80-ns long molecular dynamics simulation, where the r.m.s.d.s of the full structure and its two sub-domains SL1 (nucleotides 8–22 and 55–75) and SL2 (nucleotides 24–53 and 76–103) are most stable. The total energy for this structure is −24,296 kcal mol−1.

Stimulation of −1 PRF by miR-1224

As cellular gene expression tends to be regulated, it is reasonable to hypothesize that −1 PRF might be regulated in a sequence-specific manner. This could be achieved through base-pairing interactions between specific small noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) and −1 PRF signals, a hypothesis supported by the ability of antisense oligonucleotides to stimulate −1 PRF (reviewed in ref. 1). Computational searches revealed miR-1224, miR-711 and miR-141 as potential interacting partners with the CCR5 −1 PRF signal (Extended Data Fig. 4a). Transfection of HeLa cells with a miR-1224 precursor revealed concentration-dependent enhancement of CCR5-mediated −1 PRF (Fig. 3a). miR-1224 did not affect HIV-1-mediated −1 PRF. Addition of a miR-1224 antagomir (anti-miR-1224), or short interfering RNA knockdown of argonaute 1 reversed the effect of miR-1224 on CCR5-mediated −1 PRF (Fig. 3b). Although anti-miR-1224 seemed to stimulate CCR5 −1 PRF, the effect was not significant (P = 0.15). siRNA knockdown of mRNAs encoding proteins involved in miRNA processing inhibited CCR5-mediated −1 PRF, but stimulated HIV-1-driven −1 PRF (Fig. 3c), supporting the model of sequence-specific regulation of −1 PRF through interactions between miRNAs and −1 PRF signals. Neither miR-141 nor miR-711 affected −1 PRF in a HeLa-cells-based assay (Extended Data Fig. 4b), perhaps owing to the presence of endogenous miR-711, and/or miR-141. However, miR-141 specifically stimulated CCR5-mediated −1 PRF in CHO cells (Extended Data Fig. 4c).

miR-1224/CCR5 mRNA interactions

Two different in vitro electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) were used to probe the interactions between the CCR5 −1 PRF signal and miR-1224. In one, the RNAs were mixed and incubated at physiological temperature (‘native’), whereas in the second, they were co-denatured at high temperature and slowly annealed (‘refolded’). Both reactions were resolved through native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE; Extended Data Fig. 5a, b). Although miR-1224 interacted with the CCR5 sequence with sub-nanomolar dissociation constants in both conditions, its affinity was approximately twofold higher in the ‘native’ context (Fig. 4a). miR-1224 enhanced the appearance of multiple pre-existing conformers, particularly in the ‘refolded’ context, consistent with the structurally complex nature of the pseudoknot. miR-1224 did not interact with a transcript containing the HIV-1 −1 PRF signal (Extended Data Fig. 5c, d).

An affinity capture assay to probe CCR5–miR-1224 interactions in HeLa Tzm-BL cells expressing CCR515 revealed an approximately threefold enrichment for CCR5 mRNA relative to cells transfected with a scrambled control (Fig. 4b). In a parallel experiment in HeLa cells, the CCR5 −1 PRF signal containing dual-luciferase reporter mRNA was enriched more than 2,000-fold compared to no-miRNA controls (Fig. 4c), whereas the HIV-1 −1 PRF reporter was only enriched about tenfold. These findings demonstrate that miR-1224 specifically interacts with the CCR5 −1 PRF signal in live cells. Selective 2′-hydroxyl acylation analysed by primer extension (SHAPE) did not reveal differences in RNA modification patterns in the presence of miR-1224 (Extended Data Fig. 5e), suggesting that miR-1224 does not function to create any new conformation(s) of the CCR5 −1 PRF signal per se. Rather, it may stabilize a pre-existing structure(s) promoting efficient −1 PRF.

Mapping the miR-1224 binding site

CCR5-derived transcripts harbouring mutations in the predicted miR-1224 interacting sequences (mutants M1–M3, Extended Data Fig. 6a) were assayed by EMSA. The 5′ proximal mutant (M1) yielded the same K  (0.76 nM) as the wild-type sequence under ‘refolded’ conditions, the central sequence mutant (M2) promoted the same dissociation constant as the wild-type sequence assayed under ‘native’ conditions (0.36 nM), and the 3′ proximal binding site mutant (M3) caused an approximately 100-fold increase in K  (42 nM) (Fig. 4d, Extended Data Fig. 6b, c). These findings suggest that miR-1224 may participate in a triple helical interaction with subdomains a–d of Stem 2 under native conditions (modelled in Fig. 4e and Extended Data Fig. 6c). The predicted triple-base interaction between miR-1224 and Stem 2 is consistent with the stable 3′ end of the pseudoknot identified in the molecular dynamics simulation (Extended Data Fig. 3d, e). The ‘torsional restraint’ model of −1 PRF posits that ribosomes are directed to pause over the slippery site by Stem 2-induced supercoiling of Stem 116. The miR-1224 mapping data are consistent with this model: increased stability of the Stem 2 by the mRNA–miRNA interaction renders this structure even more difficult to resolve, further increasing the fraction of paused ribosomes. miR-141 is predicted to interact with the same region of the CCR5 −1 PRF signal whereas miR-711 is not, suggesting that miR-141 enhances CCR5-directed −1 PRF in a similar manner to miR-1224. The sequence of the mature miR-1224 is 100% conserved among higher primates (Homo, Pan, Pongo and Macaca) as is its binding site with the 3′ end of their respective CCR5 −1 PRF signals, suggesting that miR-1224-mediated regulation of CCR5 −1 PRF is evolutionarily conserved. It is also notable that the miR-1224/CCR5-interacting sequences do not conform to established seed sequences for miRNAs.

mRNA suicide through −1 PRF

Ribosome profiling data also revealed a cluster of ribosomes paused at the first −1 frame termination codon after the CCR5 slippery site (Fig. 1d). A series of rabbit β-globin-derived reporters (Extended Data Fig. 7a) were used to assess the effects of the CCR5 −1 PRF signal on mRNA steady-state abundance and stability. Steady-state abundance of the CCR5 −1 PRF-containing reporter mRNA was about 38% of the readthrough control and was further decreased upon addition of miR-1224 (∼10% of readthrough control), consistent with an inverse correlation between −1 PRF efficiency and mRNA abundance2 (Fig. 5a). An in-frame PTC strongly decreased mRNA abundance (∼1% of readthrough control). A reporter with the tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-α-derived AU-rich element (ARE) in its 3′ untranslated region (UTR)17 reduced mRNA abundance to ∼22%. In combination with the CCR5 −1 PRF signal, mRNA abundance was reduced to ∼6%, consistent with NMD and ARE-mediated decay operating independently of one another. The CCR5 slippery site mutant (SSM) decreased reporter mRNA abundance to ∼64%, and addition of miR-1224 decreased this to ∼47%. The former finding suggests that the stable mRNA pseudoknot has mRNA destabilizing activity independent of frameshifting, perhaps through the no-go mRNA pathway as described in yeast18. Its stabilization by miR-1224 may enhance this process. Alternatively, miR-1224 may promote accelerated mRNA turnover through canonical miRNA-mediated translational repression19. However, if this were true, miR-1224 should have reduced SSM mRNA abundance to the same extent as the native sequence. Abundance of the CCR5 −1 PRF signal containing reporter mRNA was increased by about 4.4-fold by partial siRNA knockdown of NMD (Fig. 5b). Abundance of the SSM construct was not increased by NMD ablation, consistent with its mRNA destabilizing activity being independent of −1 PRF-directed NMD. A transcriptional arrest time course experiment showed that the CCR5 −1 PRF signal rendered the reporter mRNA a direct substrate for NMD: its half-life was reduced to about 180 min whereas NMD ablation increased the half-life to about 380 min (Extended Data Fig. 7b).

NMD and miR-1224 affect CCR5 expression

In HeLa Tzm-BL cells the abundances of both CCR5 mRNA and CCR5 protein increased proportionally to the extent of NMD abrogation (Fig. 5c, d, siRNA_SMG1). Conversely, addition of miR-1224 decreased both CCR5 mRNA and CCR5 protein abundance. Abrogation of miRNA processing by siRNA knockdown of AGO1 or DGCR8 resulted in increased abundance mRNA and protein, consistent with inhibition of CCR5-mediated −1 PRF under these conditions. Transcriptional arrest time-course experiments demonstrated that the CCR5 mRNA is a direct substrate for NMD (Extended Data Fig. 7c). Whereas miR-1224 decreased the abundance of CCR5 mRNA, this effect was abrogated by addition of an anti-miR-1224 antagomir, but antagomir alone had no effect (Extended Data Fig. 7d). siRNA knockdown of SMG1 was epistatic to miR-1224, consistent with the mRNA destabilization activity of the miRNA being NMD-dependent. This is also consistent with findings that human UPF1 may participate in RNA silencing20, with the caveat that miR-1224 may also promote mRNA degradation by a mechanism that is independent of the NMD machinery, for example, No-go decay. Combinations involving human SMG1 siRNA knockdown plus miR-1224, human SMG1 siRNA knockdown plus the antagomir, or all three together were also supportive of this model.

−1 PRF and interleukin receptor mRNAs

To our knowledge before the current study, only three −1 PRF signals were known in mammalian genomes, all thought to be remnants of ancient retroviral insertional events21,22,23. Potential −1 PRF signals in seven additional interleukin receptor subunit mRNAs were assayed in the presence of either a scrambled siRNA control or an siRNA targeting argonaute 1. Efficient −1 PRF (>1%) was elicited by six of these (Fig. 5e). siRNA knockdown of argonaute 1 stimulated −1 PRF in some cases and inhibited it in others, consistent with sequence-specific regulation of −1 PRF by miRNAs. Ribosome profiling data10 revealed ribosomes paused and directed to new reading frames at three of these signals (Extended Data Fig. 8). Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) capable of disrupting frameshifting activity were identified in all these −1 PRF signals (Extended Data Fig. 8). These may account for disease phenotypes associated with SNPs that do not alter the primary amino acid sequences of their encoded proteins.

To summarize, precise regulation of −1 PRF is accomplished by sequence-specific interactions between individual −1 PRF signals and naturally occurring miRNAs. That global ablation of miRNA processing differentially affected −1 PRF promoted by many different signals suggests that miRNA-mediated control of −1 PRF is the biologically significant norm. This confers sequence specificity, and is energetically less expensive than producing new, or modifying pre-existing ribosomes. It may also enable rapid regulation of −1 PRF on specific mRNAs within individual cells or intracellular compartments. This solves the central question, unanswered until now, of how −1 PRF may be regulated in a sequence-specific manner, and suggests a novel mode through which −1 PRF signals may be targeted for therapeutic intervention. To our knowledge, this is also one of the few demonstrations of an miRNA affecting the expression of a cellular gene through an interaction with its ORF. The discovery of −1 PRF signals in the mRNAs encoding cytokine receptors has a potentially profound impact on our understanding of immune homeostasis. Although a robust immune response is critical for limiting and preventing infection, left uncontrolled, it can rapidly result in pathology and death. Despite a large body of literature describing how expression of small-peptide mediators of the immune response are regulated at the level of mRNA stability, this only provides a global mechanism of immune regulation by controlling production of effector molecules. In contrast, the ability to control expression of cytokine receptors through −1 PRF induced NMD, and how rates of −1 PRF in turn may be controlled by miRNAs, represents a way for individual recipient cells to modulate their responses to cytokines; this would provide the means to fine-tune immune responses, and suggests a novel molecular mechanism underlying immune desensitization. The studies described here also have consequences for directing antiviral efforts. RNA viruses such as retroviruses, coronaviruses, alphaviruses and totiviruses require extremely stringent levels of −1 PRF for their propagation1. We suggest that their −1 PRF promoting structural elements may have evolved in two different ways so as to ensure set rates of −1 PRF. First, either their −1 PRF stimulatory elements should not interact with any ncRNAs present in the cells in which they replicate, or their −1 PRF signals may have evolved in the presence of trans-acting ncRNAs specific to their host cells. If the latter is true, as suggested by stimulation of HIV-1-promoted −1 PRF in response to siRNA knockdown of argonaute, this may define a new parameter governing host cell permissiveness, presenting a novel therapeutic targeting opportunity. Thus, while the discovery of operational −1 PRF signals in cellular mRNAs suggests that global targeting of −1 PRF may not be the wisest approach, discovery and subsequent targeting of specific cellular miRNAs required by viruses to ensure proper rates of −1 PRF may present a more narrowly targeted therapeutic option.

Methods Summary

HeLa, HeLa Tet-Off, HeLa TZM-BL, CHO and Vero cells were cultured according to suppliers instructions. Insertions were amplified using PCR and ligated into appropriate backbone plasmids. −1 PRF was assayed in live cells using dual-luciferase assays. Liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis of affinity purified CCR5/β-galactosidase fusion protein digested with Asp-N was performed at the University of Maryland Proteomics Core Facility. Data generated by chemical modification assays were used for in silico three-dimensional modelling. Sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was used to monitor CCR5 protein expression, and quantitative PCR with reverse transcription (qRT–PCR) analyses were used to monitor mRNA steady-state abundance and half-lives. In vivo affinity capture used a double stranded miR-1224-5p RNA containing a sense strand 5′ biotin modification and mismatch transfected into HeLa and HeLa TZM-Bl cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays used a synthetic hsa-miR-1224-5p and transcripts harbouring the CCR5 or HIV-1 −1 PRF signals.

Online Methods

Molecular genetics and cell culture

Escherichia coli strain DH5α was used to amplify plasmid DNA. Transformations of E. coli were performed as described previously using the calcium chloride method. HeLa (ATCC), HeLa Tet-Off (Clonetech), HeLa TZM-BL (http://aidsresearch.org/, and provided by J. DeStefano), CHO and Vero cells were cultured at 37 °C in 5% (v/v) CO  using DMEM medium supplemented with 10% (v/v) FBS, 1× non-essential amino acids, (Atlanta Biologicals), and 4 mM glutamine. 1% penicillin/streptomycin was used when cultivating TZM-BL cells before splitting for RNA interference. HeLa Tet-Off cells were cultured with 200 µg ml−1 G418.

Plasmid construction

Synthetic oligonucleotides and plasmids used in this study are listed in Supplementary Materials. The PRF signal from Homo sapiens CCR5 was amplified from pCMV-XL4 (pJD819) containing the CCR5 open reading frame (Origene) using oligonucleotides with BamHI and SalI restriction sites. PCR products were ligated into p2luci (pJD175e)10 and clones were confirmed by sequencing (Genewiz). The QuikChange Lightning SDM kit (Agilent) was used to insert a stop codon immediately after the Renilla open reading frame and to make mutations to the CCR5 −1 PRF signal. pTRE-Rβ (pJD976), pTRE-Rβ-ARE (pJD975), and pTET-Off (pJD979) were gifts from G. Brewer. Oligonucleotides (IDT) were chosen to include 23 nucleotides of the β-globin exon 1, 36 nucleotides of Renilla luciferase on the 5′ side; and 23 nucleotides of β-globin exon 1, 15 nucleotides of firefly luciferase on the 3′ side. Three hundred and thirty three nucleotides of β-globin containing sequence was PCR-amplified from the CCR5 dual luciferase plasmid, purified, and used as site-directed mutagenesis primer for the QuikChange Lightning SDM kit (Agilent) to generate CCR5 containing β-globin constructs with and without the TNFα ARE. Oligonucleotides encoding the −1 PRF signals from the human IL-2γ, human and mouse IL-7α, and human IL-8α, IL-8β, IL-22α and IL-27α receptor chains were purchased containing 15–18 bases of internal overlap, PCR extended into a single BamHI- and SalI-containing product, and ligated into p2luci. Primers βGal-CCR5-Forward and βGal-CCR5Rev-Mut containing the CCR5 −1 PRF signal were synthesized by IDT. The CCR5 frameshift signal sequence was amplified by PCR from pJD827 using these primers and Pfu Ultra II Hotstart 2X Mastermix (Agilent). The PCR product was digested with BamHI and KpnI and purified with GeneJet PCR purification Kit (ThermoFisher Fermentas). Plasmid, purified on 0.8% agarose gel and extracted with GeneJet Gel extraction Kit (ThermoFisher Fermentas). The CCR5 −1 PRF signal containing PCR product was ligated into BamHI/KpnI digested pTI2524 and the resulting clone named pJD1930. Thus, the expression of β-galactosidase from pJD1930 plasmid was dependent on −1 PRF event.

−1 PRF assays

For dual-luciferase reporter assays, HeLa, CHO or Vero cells were seeded into 24-well plates (3 × 104–5 × 104 cells per well) and cultured for 2–36 h before transfection with dual-luciferase plasmids. Cells were transfected with dual luciferase plasmids using 0.6 µl of the FuGene 6 reagent in 20 µl of DMEM without FBS. 200–400 ng of plasmid was used per well and incubated for 20–60 min at room temperature. At 24–48 h post-transfection, dual luciferase assays were performed using the standard dual luciferase protocol (Promega) with slight modifications using a Turner Biosystems GloMax-Multi Microplate Multimode Reader. Changes to the standard protocol are as follows: lysates were resuspended in 200 μl 1× lysis buffer before reading using 15–35 μl lysate per well, and 50 μl of each reagent per well were used with a 10-s integration and 2-s pause between reads. Sample sizes were determined following the rigorous criteria previously described25. A minimum of 15 (three independent biological replicates assayed in quintuplicate) were performed per sample, or until normal distributions were obtained. Statistical analyses were performed as previously reported25.

To monitor −1 PRF in vitro, linear DNA templates were prepared by PCR reactions using plasmids pJD175f, pJD187, pJD827, pJD1078, and the T7-Kozak-Renilla/PolyA-Stop-firefly primer set. PCR products were purified by agarose gel electrophoresis. Capped mRNAs were synthesized using the mMESSAGE mMACHINE Kit (Ambion). Transcription reactions (40 μl) were assembled containing 2 µg linearized DNA templates, incubated at 37 °C for 4 h, and mRNAs were purified using a MEGAclear mRNA purification kit (Applied Biosystems). mRNA concentrations were calculated from OD  readings. In vitro translation reactions were assembled in a total volume of 25 µl containing 0.2 to 5 µg capped mRNAs using the Retic Lysate IVT Kit (Applied Biosystems). Reactions contained [35S]methionine (1,175 Ci mmol−1, Perkin Elmer) and the 20× –Met Translation mix provided by the kit. Reactions were incubated at 30 °C for 90 min. Translation products were resolved through 12% SDS–PAGE, and translation products were visualized using a phosphorimager.

Production and purification of CCR5/β-galactosidase −1 PRF fusion protein in yeast

Yeast strain JD1585 was created by transformation of yeast strain JD1370 with pJD1930 and selection on defined medium lacking tryptophan (−Trp). JD1585 was inoculated from overnight grown –Trp plate into 2 ml of –Trp and incubated at 30 °C in shaker overnight. This culture (0.5 ml) was used to inoculate 50 ml of –Trp in a 200 ml baffled flask and grown overnight at 30 °C. Five ml of this culture was then used to inoculate 500 ml –Trp in a 2 l volume baffled flask. Five litre of culture (10 flasks of 500 ml each) was incubated overnight at 30 °C with shaking (250 r.p.m.). Cells (35 g wet weight) were collected by centrifugation (10 min at 4,000g at 4 °C). Cells were washed and suspended in lysis buffer (0.5 g ml−1) and disrupted with glass beads (0.5 mm, MiniBeadbeater, Biospec). Fos-choline-12 (Affymetrix) detergent was added to 0.05% and homogenate was brought to 1.5 M NaCl by adding 5 M stock NaCl. Cells and large debris were removed by centrifugation at 4,000g for 10 min. The supernatant was cleared by centrifugation at 30,000g for 30 min and loaded on 4-aminophenyl-β- -thiogalactopyranoside-agarose 4B (Sigma) column (1 ml bed volume). The column was washed with 50 volumes of lysis buffer containing 1.5 M NaCl. Recombinant CCR5-β-galactosidase protein was eluted with 0.1 M sodium borate buffer (pH 10.0) and concentrated on Ultracel-50K filter units (Amicon). β-galactosidase activity was monitored during purification using β-galactosidase Assay Kit (Pierce). Eluted proteins were fractionated through 8% SDS–PAGE. A protein band of expected size (124.7 kDa) was cut from gel and analysed by mass spectrometry at the UMD Mass Spectroscopy Core Center.

Mass spectroscopic analysis of CCR5/β-galactosidase −1 PRF fusion protein

Sequencing grade Asp-N was purchased from Promega (Madison, WI). Triethylammonium bicarbonate, and iodoacetamide were purchased from Supelco. DTT was from Sigma. Formic acid, optima grade water and acetonitrile are from Fisher Scientific. In-Gel digestion was carried out following manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, gel was cut into pieces <1 mm3, destained with 50% acetonitrile (ACN) in water, dehydrated with ACN, then rehydrated with 25 mM DTT, incubated at 65 °C for 20 min, washed, dehydrated with ACN. Samples were rehydrated with 50 mM iodoacetamide, incubated at room temperature in the dark for 25 minutes, washed with water, and dehydrated with ACN. Gel was then rehydrated with 10 ng µl−1 Asp-N solution, and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted twice by sequential addition of 100 µl 50% ACN, 100 µl 20% formic acid, and 100 µl. Extracts were combined and concentrated with speedvac to dryness.

Liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis

Peptides were redissolved in 50 μl solvent A and loaded into a trapping cartridge (0.3 × 5 mm, Agilent, Palo Alto, CA) with autosampler, and desalted with 100% solvent A at 10 ml min−1 for 10 min. Peptides were separated using a Zorbax 300 B-C18 nano column (3.5 µm, 0.075 × 150 mm, Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA) with a binary gradient consisting of A: 0.1% formic acid with 2.5% acetonitrile and B: 0.1% formic acid and 97.5% acetonitrile at a flow rate of 200 nl min−1. A gradient was run from 5% B to 25%B over 60 min, followed by a 50-min gradient to 50% B, and 10-min gradient to 80%B. The gradient was held at 80% B for 5 min before returning to 5% B. Positive ion mass spectra of Nano LC eluents were acquired with a Thermo Finnigan LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer with data dependent analysis in which a full Scan FT analysis of m/z 400–1,800 with resolution at 60,000 (m/z 400) in the Orbitrap is followed by up to 5 MS/MS analyses in the linear ion trap at unit mass resolution. Peptides eluting from the HPLC column that have ions above 10,000 arbitrary intensity units and charges higher than 1 trigger the ion trap to isolate the ion and perform an MS/MS experiment scan after the MS full scan. Dynamic exclusion was set at 1 repeat count and 60 s exclusion time.

Data processing

A common contaminants protein database was downloaded from http://maxquant.org. Sequence of CCR5-LacZ was inserted into the database before the database was imported into the in-house Mascot Server and Proteome Discoverer 1.4 program. Raw data from LTQ Orbitrap was searched against the modified common contaminant database using Sequest HT and Mascot with AspN as digestion enzyme with up to 1 missed cleavage. Peptide mass tolerance was ± 20 p.p.m., and fragment mass tolerance was ± 0.8 Da. Carbamidomethyl (C), Deamidated (NQ), Oxidation (M), Acetyl (N-term) are set as variable modifications. Decoy search was performed and false discovery rate of <1% required for positive Identification. Search results showed 36% sequence coverage of the CCR5-LacZ protein. The N-terminal peptide was unambiguously identified, with loss of the initial methionine and acetylation of the N-terminal threonine.

Quantification of protein levels by ELISA

HeLa TZM-BL were transiently transfected with siRNAs against SMG1, AGO1, DGCR8, miRNA precursor of hsa-miR-1224-5p, scrambled sequence or mock transfected using HiPerFect transfection reagent (Qiagen). The cells were lysed using 0.5% Fos-choline-12 (Affymetrix) in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 lysis buffer. Protein concentrations of cell lysates were determined by Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). Concentrations of CCR5 protein were measured in 16 μg total protein of cell lysates using the CCR5 sandwich ELISA kit (US Biological Life Sciences), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. All assays were repeated in triplicate.

Quantitative real-time reverse-transcription PCR

For qPCR analyses of the β-globin based reporters, assays were performed as previously described26 with the following modifications. The dual luciferase readthrough control was used for co-transfections rather than EGFP. RNA samples for qPCR were isolated using the RNAqueous kit (Ambion), digested with rDNase (Ambion) and analysed using agarose gel electrophoresis and/or OD  measurements. The remaining samples were reverse transcribed using the iScript cDNA kit (Bio-Rad). The resulting complementary DNAs were diluted to 1:50–10,000 depending on mRNA concentration. Reactions were performed using 10 μl of LightCycler 480 SYBR Green I Master mix (Roche), 0.2–0.3 μM of each oligonucleotide, 2 μl of cDNA, and water to 20 μl per well. Samples were assayed for genomic DNA contamination by performing the assay using wells containing 1–2 μl of digested mRNA instead of cDNA. Reactions were amplified using either a Roche 480 LightCycler or a Bio-Rad CFX 96 thermocycler as follows: 25 °C for 10 s, 95 °C for 5 min, followed by 45–60 cycles of 95 °C for 10 s, 52 °C for 15 s, and 72 °C for 15 s. Melting curves were monitored by taking readings every 0.5 °C from 52–95 °C. The time-course qPCR analyses were performed with 53 °C and 54 °C annealing temperatures and 20 s extension time with no significant changes in results. For qPCR analyses of the full length CCR5 mRNA, assays were performed as described for the β-globin assays, but using oligonucleotides specific for β-micoglobulin and/or GAPDH and CCR527. Reactions were amplified using the same conditions as for the β-globin constructs except all reactions used 20 s at 55 °C for extension. All assays were performed at least three times.

Time course assays

mRNA decay time course assays using the tetracycline repressible rabbit β-globin reporter were performed as previously described with minor changes26. To monitor time-dependent decay of the CCR5 mRNA, HeLa Tzm1 cells were first transfected with either scrambled or hSMG1 siRNAs as described above. Forty eight hours after transfection, cells were treated with actinomycin D (10 μM). In all experiments, RNA isolations were performed immediately at each time point after transcriptional arrest using the RNAqueous kit (Ambion) rather than after freezing samples on dry ice.

RNAi assays

Cells were transfected with RNA oligonucleotides specific to UPF1, UPF2, SMG1, argonaute 1, argonaute 2, DGCR8, exportin 5, or random oligonucleotides using the HiPerFect transfection reagent (Qiagen). Initial transfections were performed at 1, 5, 10 nM and 20 nM for optimization. Final transfections were performed at 5 nM. The MAPK cell-death positive control was used for optimization as well as qPCR quantification of the targeted mRNA. Most final transfections were performed at 5 nM. Transfections were performed into 30,000–40,000 cells (via haemocytometer) in 500 µl of DMEM+FBS using 100 µl of DMEM without FBS and 3 µl of HiPerFect reagent after incubating for 15–20 min at room temperature. Media was replaced with fresh DMEM+FBS after 8–12 h. Assays were performed 36–72 h after siRNA transfection. When other plasmids were also transfected, they were performed separately 24–48 h after siRNA transfection using the FuGENE 6 (Roche) reagent.

miRNA transfection

Cells were transfected with the following miRNA precursors: hsa-miR-141, hsa-miR-711, hsa-miR-1224-5p, and hsa-miR-1205 using either siPORT, lipofectamine, or HiPerfect reagent (Applied Biosystems/Ambion). When performing miRNA transfections with all miRNAs, 10–30 nM was used, depending on cell viability. When performing the miRNA titration, four 1:10 dilutions were used starting at 5 nM. Transfections were performed into 20,000–40,000 cells in 500 µl DMEM+FBS using 25 µl of DMEM without FBS and 1 µl of siPORT reagent after incubating for 20 min at room temperature per well. Media was replaced with fresh DMEM+FBS after 8–12 h. Dual luciferase plasmid transfections were either performed at the same time or 24 h later using the FuGENE 6 reagent. When HiPerfect was used, the conditions followed those used for siRNA transfections.

Affinity purification of miRNA targets

Double stranded miR-1224-5p RNA containing a sense strand 5′ biotin modification and mismatch were purchased from IDT. Pull-down experiments were performed as previously described28 with the following modifications: Streptavidin agarose beads were pre-washed as described in 500 µl aliquots and stored for up to a week at −20 °C. Five washes with lysis buffer were performed rather than 3; after the final wash, 450 µl buffer was removed, samples were incubated for 5 min at 80° and quenched on ice for 2 min before isolating RNA. RNA isolations were performed using the RNAqueous kit (Ambion). qRT–PCR was used to observe mRNA isolation as previously described, using oligonucleotide primers specific for CCR5, Renilla luciferase, firefly luciferase and GAPDH for normalization.

miR-1224 electrophoretic mobility shift assays

Transcripts harbouring the CCR5 −1 PRF signal (247 nucleotides), mutants thereof, or HIV-1 −1 PRF signal (315 nucleotides) were synthesized from DNA templates using T3 RNA polymerase using MEGAscript, and purified using MEGAClear kits (Ambion). HPLC purified miR-1224-5p (5′GUGAGGACUCGGGAGGUGG3′) RNA oligonucleotide was purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies, and was 5′-[32P]-labelled by using the KinaseMax kit (Ambion). Small amounts of the CCR5 and HIV-1 derived mRNAs were also 5′-[32P]-labelled and used as markers. CCR5 or HIV RNA dilutions at 2× final concentration were mixed with equal volumes of 1.0 nM 5′-[32P]-labelled 1224-5p RNA. Samples were incubated at 37 °C for 30 min in HB buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 0.1 mM EDTA, 10 mM NaCI, 10 mM MgCI , 3% glycerol, 0.05% bromophenol blue) and immediately separated through 10% native polyacrylamide gels. For experiments with RNA refolding the RNA mix was incubated at 90 °C for 5 s, cooled quickly to 60 °C and then slowly to 37 °C (0.02 °C per s). The electrophoresis buffer was 34 mM Tris-66 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 0.1 mM EDTA, 10 mM MgCl . To confirm that multiple bands of CCR5 in native gel were RNA conformers, labelled CCR5, miR-1224-5p RNA, and the mix of these RNAs were separated through an 8% denaturing gel and visualized using a phosphoimager. Single site binding isotherms were generated using GraphPad Prizm.

Chemical modification assays

Dimethylsulphate, kethoxal and CMCT were used to probe the solvent accessibility of individual bases29,30, while NMIA was used to probe ribose 2′-OH groups31 in [32P]-labelled run-off transcripts. In a separate experiment, synthetic CCR5 (139 nM) and miR-1224 (1.1 μM) RNAs were annealed at 37 °c for 30 min in 33 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 33 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl . Structure probing with NMIA and reverse transcription reactions were subsequently performed as described31. Products were separated through 8% denaturing polyacrylamide gels, and visualized using a phosphorimager.

Molecular modelling and molecular dynamics simulation protocol

Three dimensional modelling based on the secondary structure shown in Fig. 2 was performed using programs RNAComposer32,33 and RNA2D3D34. The preliminary 10 alternative structures were obtained from the RNAComposer web server (http://euterpe.man.poznan.pl/Home). However, most of the models produced were knotted in 3D and the best two alternatives had the backbones of loop L (see Fig. 2) pass through a helix in S1. RNA2D3D was used to separate the tangled structures. The corrected models (a total of six alternatives) were minimized, equilibrated in solvent with some restraints meant to maintain the base pairs strained in the preliminary models, and subjected to short (25 ns) molecular dynamics runs without any restraints, after which the best model (average structure with the lowest minimized energy) was subjected to extended molecular dynamics simulation lasting a total of 80 ns. Given how structurally tight the initial models were and the extent of manual editing required, the extended simulation was necessary to stabilize the model and obtain an accurate average structure.

Molecular dynamics simulations were performed with Amber 12 with the ff10 Cornell force field for RNA. The Particle Mesh Ewald (PME) summation method was used to calculate the electrostatic interactions35,36,37. Following minimization, the RNA models (103 nucleotides long) were solvated in TIP3P waters with 102 neutralizing Na+ ions and additional Na+/Cl- ion pairs added to the solvent box to achieve a relative salt concentration of 0.1 M (from 51 to 57 depending on the system). The multi-step equilibration protocol started with solvent equilibration (minimization, heating and short dynamics stages) with the RNA being subject to slowly released motion restraints (holding). A periodic boundary condition was used in the simulation. The entire system was equilibrated at 300K using the Berendsen thermostat38, a cut-off of 9 Å was used with the non-bonded interactions and SHAKE was applied to all hydrogen bonds in the system. Pressure was maintained at 1.0 Pa using the Berendsen algorithm39. The last phase of the equilibration was performed for 2.0 ns with distance restraints placed on the hydrogen bonds of six base-pairs that were affected by the manual editing of the preliminary RNA models (base pairs: G8-U75, G12-U73, G13-C72, A14-U63, G16-U61, G17-C60). Following equilibration, the production simulation was performed with 2 fs time steps to obtain short trajectories of 25 ns. The total sizes of the systems subjected to molecular dynamics ranged from 71,462 to 79,346 atoms, including the 3,290 RNA atoms of the CCR5 model. The solvent boxes had a clearance distance of 10 Å (also named ‘buffer’ in Amber, that is, the minimum distance between the solute and the solvent box wall). Analyses of the molecular dynamics results excluded the equilibrations and were performed using the ptraj module of Amber.

Multiple sequence alignment of CCR5 coding sequences

Sequences for CCR5 coding sequences were chosen for 39 primates and a naive BLAST search extended these candidates to 45 sequences with the CCR5 mRNA from Danio rerio chosen as an outgroup. Sequences were aligned with Clustal W40 using default parameters (gap opening penalty: 15, extension penalty: 6, IUB matrix). The resulting alignment was manually edited using seaview41 to trim especially long 3′ UTR and long 5′ UTR sequences (notably Danio rerio, sheep, goat, rat, and mouse). A guide tree was constructed using the default parameters of BioNJ42 which was used as a starting tree for PhyML43. The GTR model was used with a nearest neighbour and SPR search strategy, 100 bootstrap replicates were performed. Branch lengths and bootstrap support are supplied above branches where appropriate.

Analysis of ribosome profiling data

Sequence reads from Guo et al.10 and Hsieh et al.44 were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus45. The ribosomal footprinting data was extracted and aligned against a library of human coding sequences from the Mammalian Gene Collection46 using Bowtie247.

The following options were used:   The resulting SAM output was parsed with a simple Perl script (available at: https://github.com/abelew/prfdb/tree/master/ingolia) which extracted reads and sorted them by position and apparent reading frame. The resulting data structure was translated into JSON and plotted with the flot library.

Genome ontology analysis

Homo sapiens accessions were collected from the PRFdb which lie more than one standard deviation from mean with respect to predicted MFE value and randomized Z-score. This population of 1,846 accessions was provided to the FuncAssociate48 analysis tool.

Supplementary information

 This file contains the sequences determined in this work. They are also deposited in the NCBI Nucleotide database. (CSV 64 kb)  

Figure 1

 , Measurement of −1 PRF in HeLa cells. −1 PRF efficiency was monitored in HeLa cells using dual luciferase reporters. Error bars denote an approximation of standard errors. ***P < 0.001 compared to the out of frame control (Student’s two-tailed t-test).  , Efficient −1 PRF promoted by the CCR5 sequence in vitro. Autoradiogram of in vitro translation reaction using mRNAs harbouring CCR5- or HIV-1-derived −1 PRF signals. Green arrows denote 0-frame encoded products. Red arrows denote −1 PRF encoded peptides. RTC indicates the readthrough control. Percentage −1 PRF promoted by CCR5 and HIV-1 frameshift signals is indicated below the lanes.  , Liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) spectrum of a proteolytic fragment containing the CCR5 frameshift peptide. N-terminally acetylated leader peptide sequence is coloured blue, CCR5-derived 0-frame sequence beginning at V94 is red, and CCR5 −1 frame encoded sequence beginning after L101 is coloured green.  , Ribosomes accumulate at the CCR5 −1 PRF signal. Data mined from ref. 10. Top, locations of the −1 PRF signal and first −1 frame termination codon are indicated. Bottom, profiling data at the slippery site (indicated in capital letters) at single nucleotide resolution. Ribosomes arrested in the three different reading frames are colour-coded.

 PowerPoint slide 

 Source data 

Figure 2

 , Best-fit two-dimensional model based on chemical modification analyses.  , Three-dimensional model, two views. Slippery site is green, stem 1 is dark blue, unpaired bases and the loop within stem 1 are light blue, paired bases in stem 2 are red, and unpaired bases in stem 2 are yellow.

 PowerPoint slide 

Figure 3

 , HeLa cells were transfected with 0–30 nmol of miR-1224 miRNA expressing constructs and with HIV-1 or CCR5 −1 PRF reporters.  , PRF assays of HeLa cells mock-transfected (0), or transfected with scrambled miRNA (Scr), a miR-1224 antagomir (anti-1224), miR-1224, miR1224 + anti-miR-1224, or miR-1224 plus an siRNA directed against argonaute 1.  , Ablation of the miRNA processing machinery affects −1 PRF promoted by the HIV-1 and CCR5 frameshift signals. −1 PRF assays were performed using cells transfected with siRNAs targeting Argonaute 1 (AGO1), Argonaute 2 (AGO2), DGCR8, exportin 5 (XPO5) or scrambled sequences (Scr). Error bars denote standard error. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 (Student’s two-tailed t-test).

 PowerPoint slide 

 Source data 

Figure 4

 , Dilutions of CCR5 −1 PRF signal (R5) transcript were mixed with [32P]-labelled miR-1224 RNA (miR), and incubated at 30 °C (Native), or denatured at 90 °C and slowly cooled (Refolded). Samples separated through native PAGE were quantified and data plotted onto single site binding isotherms. K  values and standard deviations are indicated.  , In vivo pull-down of native CCR5 mRNA in live cells. Biotinylated miR-1224 precursor or a scrambled biotinylated control (Scr) were transfected into HeLa TZM BL cells expressing CCR5. Fold enrichment of affinity purified mRNAs were analysed by quantitative PCR with reverse transcription (qRT–PCR) using CCR5- or GAPDH-specific primer sets.  , HeLa cells were co-transfected with dual-luciferase plasmids containing either the CCR5 or HIV-1 −1 PRF signal sequences and affinity-purified mRNAs were analysed as in  .  , EMSA assays were performed using miR1224 and M1, M2 and M3 variants of the CCR5 signal using native conditions. Single site binding isotherms generated from these data are plotted. K  values are indicated. For   and  , n = 6 for each sample (three times each of two technical replicates). For   and  , n = 9 for each sample (three times each for three biological replicates. Error bars denote standard deviation. *P < 0.05, ***P < 0.001 (Student’s two-tailed t-test).  , Conceptual model of CCR5 pseudoknot complexed with miR-1224 (purple).

 PowerPoint slide 

 Source data 

Figure 5

 , qRT–PCR analysis of rabbit β-globin reporter (see Extended Data Fig. 7a) steady-state abundances in HeLa cells reported as fold of the native β-globin readthrough control (RTC).  , Rabbit β-globin reporter abundances in cells transfected with siRNAs directed against human UPF1 or UPF2 compared to cells transfected with scrambled siRNA.  , HeLa TZM cells were mock-transfected, transfected with scrambled siRNA, human SMG1 siRNA (5–15 nM), miR-1224 precursor (5 and 20 nM), AGO1 or DGCR8 siRNAs (10 nM each). The effects of transfected RNA species on CCR5 mRNA steady-state abundance were assayed by qRT–PCR.  , Quantitative sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) of samples from  . Cell lysates (16 μg protein per sample) were assayed and total amounts of CCR5 protein were determined relative to standards.  , Computationally identified putative −1 PRF signals assayed in HeLa cells transfected with an siRNA directed against AGO1 or a scrambled siRNA control. Numbers in human IL8Rα denote the nucleotide positions of the beginning of the slippery sites in the native mRNA.  – , n = 9 (three times on three independent biological replicates).  , n = 8 (quadruplicate assays of two independent biological replicates). Error bars denote standard error. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 (Student’s two-tailed t-test).

 PowerPoint slide 

 Source data 

Extended Data Figure 1

 , Phylogenetic trees. The larger tree uses Danio rerio CCR5 as an outgroup while the smaller inset tree uses two Lemur species. Bootstrap support is included at each node; branch lengths are provided where appropriate. The low bootstrap values between some clades are indicative of the very small number of phylogenetically informative bases and high propensity of invariant bases.  , Sequence alignment of CCR5 coding sequences. The portion of the CCR5 coding sequence alignment containing the −1 PRF signal is shown from the seaview sequence editor. In total, these 45 species were trimmed to 7,000 bases each and comprise 827 complete sites, of which 241 are invariant and 586 were informative for phylogenetic analyses. Danio rerio (at bottom) provides an outgroup; when considering the conservation of the region surrounding the −1 PRF signal at position 408, it was removed. This results in 170 sites, of which 69 are invariant, and 58 informative. With the exception of the Lemur, the −1 PRF region is strikingly conserved among primates.

Extended Data Figure 2

 , Schematic of dual-luciferase constructs used to test the CCR5 frameshifting signal. Transcription is driven from the SV40 early enhancer/promoter and transcription termination and polyadenylation utilizes the SV40 late poly(A) signal. The in-frame control is p2luci, encoding a firefly/Renilla luciferase fusion protein. In the out of frame reporter (OOF), firefly luciferase lies in the −1 reading frame with respect to the Renilla open reading frame. In the HIV −1 PRF reporter, the −1 PRF signal of HIV-1 was cloned in between the two luciferase reporters, and the firefly ORF is in the −1 frame with respect to Renilla. The CCR5 −1 PRF reporter is the same, except that it contains the CCR5 −1 PRF signal. In the CCR5 slip site mutant (SSM), the UUUAAAA slippery heptamer of the CCR5 −1 PRF signal was mutated to GCGCGCG. The PTC reporter is based on the CCR5 −1 PRF reporter in which a premature termination codon was inserted following the Renilla open reading frame.  , Efficient −1 PRF promoted by the CCR5 sequence in CHO and Vero cells. Error bars denote standard error.  ,  , LC-MS/MS analysis of the CCR5/β-Gal −1 PRF fusion protein.  , Primary amino acid sequence of the predicted fusion protein. Matched peptides are shown in bold red. Leader sequence is highlighted in cyan. CCR5 0-frame sequence is yellow, and CCR5 −1 frame peptide is highlighted in green. Non-highlighted sequence is β-galactosidase.  , Partial list of matching peptides identified by MS/MS analysis. Highlighted sequences show MSMS spectra of TSRIPVVHAVFALKSQ (2–17) and of TSRIPVVHAVFALKSQDGHLWGG (2–24) with N-terminal acetylation.

 Source data 

Extended Data Figure 3

 , Computationally predicted and best fit 2-dimensional mRNA structures with chemical modification data. Stems 1, 2, and the loop are indicated as S1, S2 and L. The five different segments of stem 2 are labelled a–e. Nucleotide bases showing low levels of reactivity with DMS, CMCT, and kethoxal, and ribose sugars whose 2′-OH groups with NMIA were similarly non-reactive are noted as open circles. Moderately reactive sugars and bases are denoted by grey filled circles. Strongly modified (strongly reactive) sugars and bases are represented as black filled circles. Circles proximal to the bases denote reactivity of the bases, while circles distal to the bases denote reactivity of the ribose sugars. From left to right: mRNA pseudoknot best fit to data; mRNA pseudoknot predicted by Pknots; mRNA pseudoknot predicted by NUPAK; tandem stem-loops predicted by mFold. Red bases represent chemical modification patterns inconsistent with computational predictions.  ,  , Chemical modification experiments. Autoradiograms of reverse transcriptase primer extensions performed on RNA transcribed by T7 RNA Pol from template PCR amplified from CCR5 −1 PRF signal containing plasmid. Bands correspond to strong readthrough control (RT) stops 1 nucleotide 5′ of bases modified by chemical reagents.  , The CCR5 mRNA was either left unmodified (un), or modified with 3 increasing concentrations of dimethyl sulphate (DMS, reacts with A and C), 1-cyclohexyl-(2-morpholinoethyl)carbodiimide metho-p-toluene sulfonate (CMCT, reacts with U), or 1,1-dihydroxy-3-ethoxy-2-butanone (kethoxal, reacts with G) respectively.  , Primer extension reactions were performed on unmodified samples and samples incubated with 30, 65, and 110 nM NMIA (N-methyl isatoic anhydride). These are labelled 1, 2 and 3, respectively, beneath each sample, and ‘un’ denotes untreated RNA.  , The all atom r.m.s.d. plot of the 80 ns-long molecular dynamics simulation states against the reference structure (the starting state of the simulation) at the end of a 2 ns-long equilibration. All measures exclude most mobile, single-stranded, first 7 nucleotides. The full structure r.m.s.d. values are shown in black, SL1 data are plotted in cyan, and the SL2 data are plotted in red. Mean r.m.s.d. values with standard deviations are given in the box. Overall, after approximately 21 ns the structure stabilizes.  , Two views (opposite sides) of an average minimized structure based on the last 12 ns of the simulation (indicated with red arrow in  ) where all the r.m.s.d. measures converge and are most stable.

Extended Data Figure 4

 , Sequence of the CCR5 −1 PRF signal is shown. The UUUAAAA slippery site is italicized, stems 1 and 2 of the mRNA pseudoknot are coloured blue and red, respectively, and unpaired bases are black. Sequences of miR-1224, miR-711, and miR-1413, and their potential hybridization patterns with CCR5 sequence are indicated.  , Stimulation of −1 PRF by miR-1224 in HeLa cells. Cells were transfected with 5 nM of the indicated miRNA expressing constructs, or mock transfected. After 24 h incubation, cells were transfected with the indicated −1 PRF dual-luciferase reporters, and frameshift assays were performed 24–36 h. later.  , miR-141 stimulates CCR5 mediated −1 PRF in CHO cells. CHO and Vero cells were transfected with 5 nM of the indicated miRNA expressing constructs, with scrambled miRNA sequences, or mock transfected. After 24 h incubation, cells were transfected with the indicated −1 PRF dual-luciferase reporters, and frameshift assays were performed 24–36 h later. Error bars denote standard error. *P < 0.05.

 Source data 

Extended Data Figure 5

 ,  , In vitro binding of mIR-1224 with the CCR5 −1 PRF signal. Serial dilutions from 30 nM to 0.25 nM of a CCR5 −1 PRF signal (R5) containing transcript were mixed with equal volumes of 1.0 nM [32P]-labelled synthetic miR-1224 RNA (miR), and incubated for 30 °C for 30 min ( , Native), or at 90 °C for 5 s, cooled quickly to 60° and then slowly to 37° ( , Refolded). Samples were separated through 10% native PAGE, dried, and intensities of retarded bands were quantified using phosphorimager and BioRad Quantity One software.  ,  , miR-1224 does not bind to the HIV-1 −1 PRF signal in vitro.  , ‘Native’ annealing conditions.  , ‘Refolded’ annealing conditions. For  – , n = 6 for each sample (three times each of two technical replicates).  , SHAPE analysis of the CCR5 −1 PRF signal in the absence (lane 7) or presence (lane 8) of miR-1224.

Extended Data Figure 6

 , Putative miR-1224 binding sites were changed to their complements (green).  , Gel-shift assays using miR1224 and M1, M2 and M3 variants of the CCR5 signal (described in Extended Data Fig. 5) using native conditions. n = 6 for each sample (three times each of two technical replicates).  , Models diagramming experimental results. The CCR5 pseudoknot is cartooned with wild-type sequences shown as black lines, mutant sequences shown as green lines, and miR-1224 in red. Proposed triple helical interactions between the CCR5 −1 PRF promoting pseudoknot and miR-1224 are shown in the Native and M2 models.

Extended Data Figure 7

 , Rabbit β-globin reporter containing a doxycycline repressible promoter and SV40 derived polyA signal is shown. The native CCR5 −1 PRF signal was cloned into exon 1. Controls included insertion of the CCR5 SSM −1 PRF signal, PTCs in all three reading frames at this position, or insertion of the 27 nucleotide TNF-α-derived A-U rich element (ARE) immediately following the rabbit β-globin open reading frame.  , Time course measurements of rabbit β-globin reporter abundances transcriptionally arrested with doxycycline.  , Time course measurements of native CCR5 mRNA reporter abundances from HeLa-TZM BL cells transcriptionally arrested with actinomycin D. Cells were transfected with SMG1 miRNA or scrambled miRNA control.  , Effects of various RNAs on CCR5 mRNA steady-state abundance. HeLa-TZM BL cells expressing CCR5 were transfected as follows: scrambled siRNA control (scr), human SMG1 siRNA (Smg), miR-1224 (1224), a mIR-1224 antagomir (anti), and combinations thereof.  – , n = 9 (three times on three independent biological replicates). Error bars denote standard error. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 (Student’s two-tailed t-test).

 Source data 

Extended Data Figure 8

Operational −1 PRF signals are shown as Feynman diagrams. SNPs were identified and mapped to −1 PRF signals using the http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/ utility and are indicated below sequences. For the IL2RG, IL7RA and IL27RA sequences, minimum free energy (MFE) landscapes below the Feynman diagrams depict black vertical lines to delineate the positions of slippery heptamers; the horizontal green line shows the mean Vienna RNAfold value over the ORF; the horizontal red line shows the mean pknots value over the ORF; the horizontal blue line shows the mean nupack value. Green, red and blue lines delineate the MFE over a sliding 105-bp window. Arrows indicate where −1 PRF signals align with paused ribosomes in profiling data.

