Recent genetic findings in schizophrenia and their therapeutic relevance

Abstract

Over 100 loci are now associated with schizophrenia risk as identified by single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genome-wide association studies. These findings mean that ‘genes for schizophrenia’ have unquestionably been found. However, many questions remain unanswered, including several which affect their therapeutic significance. The SNPs individually have minor effects, and even cumulatively explain only a modest fraction of the genetic predisposition. The remainder likely results from many more loci, from rare variants, and from gene–gene and gene–environment interactions. The risk SNPs are almost all non-coding, meaning that their biological significance is unclear; probably their effects are mediated via an influence on gene regulation, and emerging evidence suggests that some key molecular events occur during early brain development. The loci include novel genes of unknown function as well as genes and pathways previously implicated in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia, e.g. NMDA receptor signalling. Genes in the latter category have the clearer therapeutic potential, although even this will be a challenging process because of the many complexities concerning the genetic architecture and mediating mechanisms. This review summarises recent schizophrenia genetic findings and some key issues they raise, particularly with regard to their implications for identifying and validating novel drug targets.

Introduction

It has long been known that schizophrenia has a substantial genetic component, with a complex, non-Mendelian inheritance. Estimates of heritability range from ~65–80% (Lichtenstein et al., 2009; Sullivan et al., 2003). Recent research has considerably advanced our understanding in terms of identifying risk loci, the nature of the genetic architecture, and the mechanisms by which genetic risk is conferred (Giusti-Rodriguez and Sullivan, 2013; Gratten et al., 2014; Mowry and Gratten, 2013). Equally, the data emphasise just how complicated is the picture, how little of it has yet been revealed, and the challenges that remain in translating the information into clinically or therapeutically relevant advances (McCarroll and Hyman, 2013; Muglia, 2012; O’Connell et al, 2011). Here, the main findings and themes to emerge from the recent genomic studies of schizophrenia are briefly summarised, before considering their therapeutic implications in terms of target discovery and validation.

The genetic architecture of schizophrenia

Genetic risk for schizophrenia arises from different forms of DNA sequence variation: the best established are those due to single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and copy number variants (CNVs). Both act as risk factors; there are no confirmed causal mutations, nor families in which schizophrenia segregates in a Mendelian fashion.

SNPs

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have yielded, as their sample size has grown, increasing and now unequivocal evidence for common SNPs contributing to schizophrenia risk. In a study and meta-analysis involving about 21,000 cases and 38,000 controls by the Psychiatric Genetics Consortium (PGC) (Ripke et al., 2013), 22 loci were identified which contain SNP(s) genome-wide significant for association to schizophrenia. These can be considered statistically robust and indicate that one or more genes at the locus, and one or more variant within the gene(s), contribute to schizophrenia risk (Table 1). These SNPs are but the tip of the iceberg, with estimates that over 8000 SNPs independently contribute to schizophrenia, and which together will explain over 50% of the genetic predisposition (Ripke et al., 2013). The findings confirm that schizophrenia is a highly polygenic disorder (Lee et al., 2012; Purcell et al., 2009). A new analysis from the PGC on a considerably enlarged sample (‘PGC2’, in total, almost 37,000 cases and 113,000 controls) has begun to reveal these additional genes, identifying over 100 loci (implicating about 600 genes) that are now genome-wide significant for schizophrenia (Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, 2014).

Several factors are important to note about the GWAS findings:

Some of these genetic considerations are discussed further below, in the context of their psychopharmacological implications. The Box illustrates in more detail some of the key aspects about SNP associations to schizophrenia, taking the example of ZNF804A, arguably the first bona fide schizophrenia risk gene.

CNVs

Some of the genetic risk for schizophrenia is not mediated via common SNPs but by CNVs and other rare variants. CNVs are lengths of DNA (of the order of a million nucleotides) which are either deleted or duplicated, but which are too small to have been seen using conventional karyotyping methods. Recent microarray and other technologies show that CNVs are a normal feature of the genome, but also that CNVs which affect particular genomic regions are associated with an increased risk of schizophrenia. Eight such genomic regions are well established (Mowry and Gratten, 2013). Most encompass multiple genes, although two affect a single gene: 2p16.3 deletion (NRXN1; neurexin 1), and 7q36.3 duplication (VIPR2; vasoactive intestinal peptide receptor 2). Compared with schizophrenia-associated SNPs, each CNV is penetrant (Kirov et al., 2014) and confers a significantly increased risk of illness (odds ratios for several CNVs exceed 8), but each CNV is extremely rare, except for hemideletion of 22q11 (velocardiofacial syndrome; Schneider et al., 2014). The contribution that CNVs make overall to the aetiology of schizophrenia is unknown; a recent population-based study estimated that 5% of cases had a CNV of probable causal significance (Costain et al., 2013), though other estimates are lower (Rees et al., 2014). Many schizophrenia-associated CNVs occur de novo (Xu et al., 2011); the others are inherited. Like SNPs, the schizophrenia-associated CNVs do not show diagnostic specificity, also conferring risk of autism and learning disability (Malhotra and Sebat, 2012), though perhaps not bipolar disorder (Grozeva et al., 2010).

The dichotomy presented here between common SNPs of small effect, and rare but penetrant large CNVs, is an over-simplification. Exome sequencing (in which the expressed regions of each gene are sequenced in their entirety) is revealing a spectrum of schizophrenia-associated genetic variants (Gilman et al., 2012; Gulsuner et al., 2013), as there is with other psychiatric disorders (Visscher et al., 2012). In a recent large study, Purcell et al. (2014) show that schizophrenia is also associated with rare single nucleotide coding variants and by small insertions or deletions affecting a few nucleotides (‘indels’). This form of genetic variation was previously largely invisible. Purcell et al. (2014) estimate that such mutations account for a broadly comparable proportion of schizophrenia risk as do CNVs, with both contributing roughly one-tenth of the heritability attributable to common SNPs. Fromer et al. (2014) use family trios to show that these mutations are commonly de novo, and associated with more neurodevelopmental and cognitive impairment than cases without such mutations. It is important to note that these rare variant studies do not implicate conclusively any specific gene, but instead reveal an overall (and very modest) excess of such variants in schizophrenia, with clustering to functionally defined gene networks, consistent with the GWAS findings, as described below. Note also that, as with SNPs, proving the causality of a disease-associated rare variant is not a trivial undertaking (MacArthur et al., 2014).

There is debate as to whether research should focus on the genes and SNPs implicated by GWAS, since they are common, or on the rare variants, since their effects are penetrant and thus provide more traction on the core biology. Given the proliferation of genetic findings, only a selected few (in either category) can be taken forward for experimental investigation. Different research groups are making different choices and adopting different strategies, and it remains to be seen which prove to be most successful (McCarthy et al., 2014).

The ‘missing heritability’

The existing findings account for only a minority of the heritability of schizophrenia, and there are various explanations for what accounts for the rest (Gibson, 2012; Lee et al., 2011; Manolio et al., 2009). Firstly, as noted, many more SNPs, and more CNVs and rare variants, will no doubt be found as exome- and genome-sequencing studies bear fruit. Secondly, it is likely that at least some, and possibly much, of the genetic risk reflects gene–gene interactions (epistasis; Mackay, 2014) rather than simply the cumulative effect of multiple independent genes (Phillips, 2008). There are preliminary clinical (Nicodemus et al., 2010), and experimental (Papaleo et al., 2014) data which support a role for epistasis in schizophrenia, but it has not been systematically investigated, and GWAS studies are not well suited to identify it. Thirdly, epigenetic factors (such as DNA methylation and histone modifications) may be involved (Daxinger and Whitelaw, 2012; Dempster et al., 2013), and contribute to gene–environment interactions, whereby part of the genetic risk for schizophrenia operates by altering sensitivity to environmental factors, such as obstetric complications or early use of cannabis. As with epistasis, there are some intriguing findings (e.g. Børglum et al., 2014; Di Forti et al., 2012; Nicodemus et al., 2008) but as yet few robust data (Iyegbe et al., 2014).

From genes to networks and pathways

For all forms of schizophrenia-associated genetic variation, there is increasing evidence, both empirical and bioinformatic, that the implicated genes converge upon biochemical pathways and networks. This is an important finding, both for understanding the core pathophysiology of the disorder, and also for therapeutics. Five examples are mentioned here.

NMDA receptor signalling

A notable convergence is upon NMDA receptor (NMDAR) signalling, providing a genetic complement to, and corroboration of, the prominent pre-existing hypothesis that NMDAR hypofunction (and glutamate synaptic function more generally) is important in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia (Coyle et al., 2003; Frohlich and Van Horn, 2014; Harrison and Eastwood, 1998; Kantrowitz and Javitt, 2010; Marek et al., 2010; Olney and Farber, 1995). The initial suggestions for a genetic convergence on NMDAR signalling were based on candidate gene findings (Collier and Li, 2003; Harrison and Owen, 2003; Harrison and Weinberger, 2005; Moghaddam, 2003) and received preliminary support from a bibliometric analysis (Harrison and West, 2006). Much stronger evidence has followed. NMDAR-related and postsynaptic signalling complex genes are over-represented amongst schizophrenia-associated CNVs (Kirov et al., 2012) and are also enriched for rare variants (Fromer et al., 2014; Purcell et al., 2014; Timms et al., 2013). Finally, a SNP within the NMDAR GRIN2A subunit gene is now genome-wide significant for schizophrenia, as are SNPs at the loci for GRIA1, GRM3 and SRR (Table 1), all of which impact on NMDAR signalling. Moreover, NMDAR signalling is critically involved in synaptic plasticity, interacting with the activity-regulated cytoskeletal protein (ARC) complex. It is thus notable that schizophrenia genes are also enriched for ARC genes (Fromer et al., 2014; Glessner et al., 2010; Lips et al., 2012; Malhotra et al., 2011; Purcell et al., 2014) and for those involved in other aspects of synaptic transmission (Kenny et al., 2014; Lips et al., 2012; Owen et al., 2005; Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, 2014). In total, there is now compelling evidence that synaptic dysfunction, particularly that related to NMDAR signalling, is one of the pathways by which the genetic predisposition to schizophrenia is mediated (Pocklington et al., 2014).

Immune function and the MHC locus

An immune involvement is another longstanding hypothesis of schizophrenia, based on various lines of evidence (Carter et al., 2014; Patterson, 2009), including an association with human leukocyte antigen (HLA) status (McGuffin, 1979). GWAS studies have confirmed that the MHC locus on chromosome 6, which encodes HLA and other immune genes (as well as some genes not related to immune function), is associated with the disorder (Corvin and Morris, 2014; McGuffin and Power, 2013; Purcell et al., 2009; Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, 2014). There is also evidence for involvement of immune genes located outside the MHC region (Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, 2014). The MHC locus is probably one of the sources of genetic difference between schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, since the latter shows no association (Andreassen et al., 2013). Intriguingly, the discovery that MHC genes also have functions in brain development and in glutamate receptor signalling and synaptic plasticity (Fourgeaud et al., 2010; Lee et al., 2014) provides a potential link between MHC- and NMDAR-related aspects of the genetic aetiology of schizophrenia (McAllister, 2014).

Calcium signalling

Calcium signalling is emerging as another genetic convergence. CACNA1C, which encodes the L-type calcium channel Ca 1.2 α subunit, was first shown to be genome-wide significant for bipolar disorder (see Bhat et al., 2012). It was subsequently shown to also be a GWAS hit across several disorders (Cross Disorder Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, 2013a) and significant for schizophrenia alone, along with CACNB2 (encoding the Ca β2 subunit) and other genes involved in calcium regulation (Ripke et al., 2013; Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, 2014). These genes also contain an excess of rare variants in schizophrenia (Purcell et al., 2014). Abnormalities of calcium signalling were already well documented in bipolar disorder (Casamassima et al., 2010), but involvement in schizophrenia was perhaps less anticipated. Of note, calcium signalling (Berridge, 2014), including L-type calcium channels, are integral to many aspects of synaptic plasticity, key signalling cascades, and cognition (Heck et al., 2014; Moosmang et al., 2005; White et al., 2008).

NRG1–ERBB4–PI3K–AKT1 pathway

The above three examples concern over-representation of genes within a functionally defined gene set. Complementing these, the best example of convergence of multiple genetic hits within a well-established biochemical pathway is the neuregulin 1 (NRG1)–ERBB4–PI3K–AKT1 pathway. Although it is important to point out that none of these genes are significant in the large GWAS studies, there is evidence for association of all four genes to schizophrenia, and for epistasis between them (Emamian et al., 2004; Harrison and Law, 2006; Hatzimanolis et al., 2013; Law et al., 2012; Nicodemus et al., 2010; Norton et al., 2006). This is a key pathway regulating cellular growth and activity (Mei and Nave, 2014; Vanhaesebroeck et al., 2010; Zheng et al., 2012). Its role in schizophrenia illustrates the point made earlier that the risk SNPs may preferentially affect certain isoforms of each gene; for example, type IV NRG1 (Law et al., 2006; Paterson et al., 2014; Tan et al., 2007), the CYT-1 isoform of ERBB4 (Law et al., 2007), and the p100δ isoform of the catalytic subunit of PI3K (Law et al., 2012). This isoform selectivity is not only pathophysiologically interesting, but may provide opportunities for selective drug targeting (Barrie et al., 2012; Lipscombe et al., 2013). Furthermore, NRG1 and ERBB4 have direct and indirect interactions with NMDAR signalling (Banerjee et al., 2010), whilst AKT1 (protein kinase C) impacts on the GSK3β–Wnt pathway which is also implicated in the disorder (Freyberg et al., 2010). These wider interactions highlight that there may be ‘meta-convergence’ of schizophrenia genetic risk across quasi-independent pathways.

MIR137 and its targets

A different form of genetic convergence is related to the microRNA-encoding gene MIR137, another locus which is genome-wide significant for schizophrenia. MicroRNAs are non-protein-coding genes, whose RNA products bind to the 3’ region of specific mRNAs and inhibit their translation. Several of the mRNA targets of MIR137 (determined empirically, or predicted bioinformatically) are also GWAS schizophrenia genes (including TCF4, ZNF804A, and CACNA1C; Kim et al., 2012; Kwon et al., 2013; Wright et al., 2013; see also Boudreau et al., 2014), suggesting that there may be functional impairment of a network of MIR137-regulated genes in schizophrenia. However, the evidence is limited, and it is not even certain that the signal at this locus is attributable to MIR137 and not to the adjacent DYPD gene – an illustration of the difficulty noted earlier moving from locus to gene (Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, 2014).

Therapeutic implications of genetic discoveries

Genomic discoveries can contribute to therapeutics in several ways (Green and Guyer, 2011; Manolio, 2013): target identification; rational drug design; genetic stratification in clinical trials; genetic prediction of efficacy and toxicity; development of gene therapy; and even genetic influences on the outcome of psychological and social interventions. Here, the discussion focuses on how recent and forthcoming genetic discoveries about schizophrenia can help to identify drug targets to treat the disorder. Genetic effects on response to, and side-effects of, existing treatments are discussed elsewhere (Arranz et al, 2011; Harrison, 2014; Zhang and Malhotra, 2013).

Whilst genetics provides the rational route to treatments which can correct the core underlying biochemical abnormalities of a heritable disorder like schizophrenia, such benefits are unlikely to be either direct or rapid. A reality check is provided by Plenge et al. (2013), who list a series of generic criteria to be considered when applying genetic findings to drug target validation (Table 2). Whilst it is a moot point whether these criteria are all valid in the context of schizophrenia, they do serve to illustrate the substantial size of the task ahead. Indeed, at present we fall at the first hurdle (and at most if not all of the others); for example, we have few if any causal variants, we merely have statistically associated tag SNPs and large CNVs, the impacts of which (as well as the relevant functions of the affected gene[s]) are at best poorly understood. Thus, it is usually not clear whether the therapeutic goal would be to enhance or decrease the actions of the implicated gene product. And, critically, since each gene independently contributes such a small amount of the variance, a drug may well not produce significant therapeutic traction even if it were perfect at correcting the abnormality.

So, what is the way ahead, avoiding both naïve optimism and nihilism? The middle-ground is to use genetic information not as a stand-alone determinant for target identification or validation, but as one factor to be considered in conjunction with a range of other sources of information, and taking into account practical considerations. How might this work, and what are some of the issues involved (see Table 3)?

As might be expected, genetically driven therapeutic progress in medicine to date has been greatest in situations where a single gene is the sole or primary cause of the disease (e.g. for certain cancers and Mendelian disorders; Green and Guyer 2011; Sanseau et al., 2012). Yet even in these domains, advances have been few (Dietz, 2010). Within psychiatry, we still await mature therapeutic fruits of research into the neurodegenerative (e.g. Huntington’s disease; familial Alzheimer’s disease) and neurodevelopmental (e.g. Rett syndrome) disorders for which the causal genes and the mutations within them have been known for well over a decade, and despite considerable advances in understanding their molecular pathogenesis (Gadalla et al., 2011; Huang and Mucke, 2012; Ross and Tabrizi, 2011). On the other hand, these cautionary notes in no way detract from the significance of the genetic discoveries for schizophrenia therapeutics. It is from genetics that the core biochemical and molecular basis of the disorder will finally be elucidated, and it is from the latter understanding that rationally designed and effective treatments will be developed. This is a prize well worth striving for. Notably, a recent study showed how the genetics of rheumatoid arthritis is informing target validation and drug discovery. Okada et al. (2014) report that the targets of existing rheumatoid arthritis drugs significantly overlap with the disease-associated genes (3.7-fold enrichment, p<10-5); they also provide genetic data which suggest that certain drugs currently being used in cancer are worth trialling in rheumatoid arthritis. These findings are encouraging, since the genetic architecture of rheumatoid arthritis shows many similarities with schizophrenia (e.g. both currently have ~100 genome-wide significant loci, most with odds ratios <1.2, and without the causal variant at each locus having been identified).

Conclusions

Genetic research over the past decade has provided fundamental insights into the nature of schizophrenia, with identification of the first indisputable risk loci and genes, and discovery that rare variants also contribute to the genetic predisposition. The results are beginning to reveal the key gene networks and biochemical pathways, are already driving the design and focus of neurobiological studies of the disorder, are influencing pharmacotherapeutic research strategies, and – though not discussed here – are close to impacting on clinical diagnostic practice (Costain et al., 2013; Rees et al., 2014). Equally, with the discoveries comes the sobering realisation that the genetic basis of schizophrenia is even more complex, in many ways, than had generally been anticipated. Finding loci and genes for schizophrenia is a triumph, but it is merely the start of a long process towards meaningful biological understanding, let alone better treatment, of the disorder. Genetics augments but does not replace the other key elements in drug development, and does not remove the many other hurdles (Filippich et al., 2013; Hyman, 2014; Pratt et al., 2012; Winchester et al., 2014). But at least the genetic findings provide a strong rationale for, and firm foundations on which to build, the next generation of studies, as we sequence rather than sample the genome, integrate genomics with the other ‘omics’, develop new analytical and bioinformatic tools, discover how genes interact with each other and with the environment, and clarify how the genes and their variants actually drive the pathophysiology. It is to be hoped that these opportunities encourage further academic and pharmaceutical investments. The potential benefits and rewards are huge – and put the scale, expense, and risk of the undertaking into proportion.

