Progesterone receptor assembly of a transcriptional complex along with activator protein 1, signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 and ErbB-2 governs breast cancer growth and predicts response to endocrine therapy

Abstract

Introduction

The role of the progesterone receptor (PR) in breast cancer remains a major clinical challenge. Although PR induces mammary tumor growth, its presence in breast tumors is a marker of good prognosis. We investigated coordinated PR rapid and nonclassical transcriptional effects governing breast cancer growth and endocrine therapy resistance.

Methods

We used breast cancer cell lines expressing wild-type and mutant PRs, cells sensitive and resistant to endocrine therapy, a variety of molecular and cellular biology approaches, in vitro proliferation studies and preclinical models to explore PR regulation of cyclin D1 expression, tumor growth, and response to endocrine therapy. We investigated the clinical significance of activator protein 1 (AP-1) and PR interaction in a cohort of 99 PR-positive breast tumors by an immunofluorescence protocol we developed. The prognostic value of AP-1/PR nuclear colocalization in overall survival (OS) was evaluated using Kaplan-Meier method, and Cox model was used to explore said colocalization as an independent prognostic factor for OS.

Results

We demonstrated that at the cyclin D1 promoter and through coordinated rapid and transcriptional effects, progestin induces the assembly of a transcriptional complex among AP-1, Stat3, PR, and ErbB-2 which functions as an enhanceosome to drive breast cancer growth. Our studies in a cohort of human breast tumors identified PR and AP-1 nuclear interaction as a marker of good prognosis and better OS in patients treated with tamoxifen (Tam), an anti-estrogen receptor therapy. Rationale for this finding was provided by our demonstration that Tam inhibits rapid and genomic PR effects, rendering breast cancer cells sensitive to its antiproliferative effects.

Conclusions

We here provided novel insight into the paradox of PR action as well as new tools to identify the subgroup of ER+/PR + patients unlikely to respond to ER-targeted therapies.

Introduction

The progesterone receptor (PR) is a key hormonal player in the breast cancer scenario [1]. However, understanding the molecular mechanisms through which PR controls breast cancer growth and response to endocrine treatments remains a major clinical challenge. In its classical mechanism, PR acts as a ligand-induced transcription factor (TF) interacting with specific progesterone response elements (PREs) in the promoter of target genes. In addition, rapid or nongenomic PR effects in breast cancer have been described in several works, including ours, demonstrating [2] PR ability to activate c-Src, p42/p44 mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) [3-5], phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI-3 K)/Akt [5], and Jaks/signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (Stat3) [6,7] pathways, which in turn mediate multiple aspects of PR function [1,8]. We also revealed that progestin induces the rapid phosphorylation of the ErbB-2 receptor tyrosine kinase [9], whose involvement in mammary tumorigenesis has long been known [10], and ErbB-2 nuclear translocation in breast cancer [9]. Intriguingly, progestin regulates the expression of an important number of genes which lack canonical PREs in their promoters, including key regulators of cell cycle progression, such as cyclin D1, p21CIP1 and p27KIP1[11-13]. This may occur via a nonclassical PR transcriptional mechanism through PR tethering to other TFs in the promoter of target genes. This mechanism raises the exciting question of whether PR rapid stimulation of signaling pathways induces the phosphorylation of TFs that in turn participate in nonclassical PR transcriptional tethering mechanisms. Cyclin D1 is an ideal gene to answer this query. We and others have long shown that progestin induces cyclin D1 gene expression in breast cancer [8,9,11]. On the other hand, several works demonstrated that progestin rapid activation of p42/p44MAPKs mediates PR regulation of Cyclin D1 expression in mammary tumor cells [8,11]. The complex cyclin D1 promoter contains response elements for a large number of TFs, among them an activator protein 1 (AP-1) site [14]. AP-1 factor is a dimer composed by Jun and Fos family members that recognizes a cis-tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate-responsive element (TRE) [15]. Progestin up-regulation of c-Fos and c-Jun expression in breast cancer has long been found [16]. The transcriptional activity of AP-1 is modulated by signaling cascades, including c-Jun N-terminal (JNK) and p42/p44MAPKs, which upon activation by growth factors and serum induce Jun and Fos protein phosphorylation [17-19]. In addition, AP-1 involvement in breast cancer growth and expression of AP-1 members in human breast cancer have also been reported [20-22].

Here we put together the pieces of the puzzle linking PR rapid activation of p42/p44MAPKs to AP-1 transcriptional activity and to the assembly of PR transcriptional complexes governing cyclin D1 expression and breast cancer growth. We also identified that in human breast tumors, nuclear colocalization of PR and activated c-Jun is a novel marker of better overall survival (OS) in patients receiving anti-estrogen receptor (ER) therapy with tamoxifen (Tam) and revealed a new mechanism underlying Tam resistance.

Methods

Animals and tumors

Experiments were carried out with female BALB/c mice raised at the Instituto de Biología y Medicina Experimental (IBYME). Animal studies were conducted as described [9,23], in accordance with the standards of animal care as outlined in the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and were approved by the IBYME Animal Research Committee.

Patients and tissue microarrays (TMAs)

The Review Board on Human Research of Universidad de La Frontera (UF) reviewed and approved the collection of tumor specimens, our survey data, and all clinical and pathological information as well as the retrospective biomarker analyses on anonymized specimens from the Temuco Hospital archival cohort. We selected 99 PR + paraffin-embedded tissue samples from a cohort of 273 consecutively archived invasive breast carcinomas from the files of the Histopathology Department of Temuco Hospital, Chile, from 1998 to 2006 [24]. Follow-up data were available for up to 13 years with a median follow-up time of 53 months. All retrospectively selected patients were treated with surgery, and 85 received tamoxifen after surgery. Informed written consents were obtained from all patients before inclusion. Pre-treatment patient staging was classified according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) system [25] through the Elston and Ellis histological grading system [26]. TMAs were constructed at the UF TMA Core Facility. In brief, H&E sections of all tumors were re-evaluated by a pathologist (PG) for suitability for TMA construction. Representative areas of tumor sections for each case were selected and circled to match the blocks for the tissue microarray. Blocks matching the circled slides were then retrieved to prepare the recipient block for the microarray. To assure the representation of selected cores, two areas of tumor sections per case were determined for assembly of the recipient blocks. Each target area on the selected blocks was punched to form a 2-mm-diameter tissue core and was placed consecutively on approximately 3 × 2 cm recipient blocks using a tissue microarrayer (Beecher Instrument, Silver Spring, MD, USA). To assure the specificity of our results, C4HD tumors growing in the presence and absence of MPA were included in the TMAs as positive and negative controls, respectively. Tissue microarrays were then cut to 5 μm sections and placed on silane-coated glass slides, and the first and last slides were stained for H&E.

Antibodies and reagents

Antibodies and reagents used are detailed under Supplemental methods (see Additional file 1).

Cells, treatments and proliferation assays

C4HD epithelial cells from the model of mammary carcinogenesis induced by MPA in mice display high levels of ER and PR, lack glucocorticoid and androgen receptor and overexpress ErbB-2 [2]. T47D and BT474 breast cancer cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection. T47D-Y cells were a gift from K. Horwitz (University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO, USA). BT474-HR6 clone, selected for its resistance to the ErbB-2 antibody trastuzumab, was already described [27] and was a gift from C. Arteaga (Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA). Selection of another trastuzumab-resistant clone, BT474-HR, was done following the previously described protocol [27]. Primary cultures of epithelial cells from C4HD tumors were performed as described [9]. T47D cell variants were cultured as we previously described (6) BT474 cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 [28] and both BT474-HR and HR6 clones in IMEM both supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS). All cell types were starved in 0.1% charcolized FCS (ChFCS) for 48 h before stimulation with MPA or E2 as detailed under Results or were pretreated with RU486 or Tam for 90 minutes before MPA or E2 stimulation. In experiments assessing the effects of mutant c-Jun (TAM-67), c-Fos (A-Fos) or ErbB-2 (hErbB-2ΔNLS) cells were transfected as we already described with the corresponding plasmid or empty plasmid for 24 h before MPA treatment [9]. To study cell proliferation we used [3H]-thymidine incorporation as a measure of DNA synthesis. We already demonstrated that [3H]-thymidine uptake correlates with the number of cells/well in our C4HD model system [2], which is a direct measure of cell proliferation. In addition, cell cycle distribution was analyzed by flow cytometry as we described [9].

Western blots

SDS-PAGE and immunoblots were performed as we previously described [9]. The NE-PER Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Extraction Reagents technique (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, USA) was performed as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Experiments in which phosphorylation levels of c-Jun, c-Fos, c-Src and p42/p44 MAPKs were explored were repeated three to five times. Experiments assessing cyclin D1, ErbB-2, PR and ERα protein levels were also repeated three to five times. Signal intensities of phospho-proteins were analyzed by densitometry and normalized to total protein bands. Similarly, signal intensities of cyclin D1, ErbB-2, PR and ERα bands were normalized to actin or β-tubulin bands. Data analysis showed a significant increase in protein phosphorylation by MPA or Tam when indicated, in comparison with untreated cells and a significant inhibition of MPA-induced phosphorylation by RU486, UO126 or Tam as described under Results (P <0.001). A similar data analysis showed that compared to control cells, the increase in cyclin D1 levels by MPA treatment was significant, as was the inhibition of MPA effects by TAM-67, A-Fos, ErbB-2ΔNLS, c-Jun and c-Fos siRNAs or Tam when indicated), and that expression levels of PR-A and –B in BT474-HR and HR6 clones were significantly lower as compared to those in BT474 cells (P <0.001). Differences between groups were analyzed by unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test.

Plasmids and transient transfections

The luciferase reporter plasmid downstream of the cyclin D1 human promoter region (−1745 cyclin D1-Luc), a construct truncated at position −963 with a point mutation in the TRE site, and the empty vector pA3 Luc were provided by R. Pestell (Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago, IL, USA). The luciferase reporter plasmid containing three copies of the TRE binding site (AP-1/TRE:Luc) was a gift from S. Cook (Cambridge, UK). The Renilla luciferase expression plasmid RL-CMV and the MMTV-Luc vector were obtained from Promega (Madison, WI, USA). Dominant negative c-Jun expression vector, TAM-67 [29] was provided by M. Shipp (Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA) via G. Rabinovich (IBYME, Buenos Aires, Argentina). The dominant negative c-Fos expression vector, A-Fos [30], was a gift from C. Vinson (NCI, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA). The GFP-tagged human ErbB-2 mutant which lacks the putative nuclear localization signal sequence (hErbB-2ΔNLS), was provided by M.C. Hung (The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA) [31]. Plasmids encoding the human wild-type hPR-B and the mutant C587A-PR-B, which lacks the ability to bind to DNA [32], were provided by K. Horwitz. The mutant PR-BmPro [4] was a gift from D. Edwards (Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA). Tranfections of T47D-Y cells with C587A-PR-B and PR-BmPro mutants were conducted as we previously described using vector concentrations which resulted in mutant PRs expression levels comparable to those present in T47D cells [5]. In experiments assessing MPA capacity to induce the transcriptional activation of AP-1, C4HD and T47D cells were transiently transfected for 24 h with 1 μg of AP-1/TRE:Luc reporter, -1745 cyclin D1-Luc reporter plasmid, or the truncated −963 construct and 10 ng of RL-CMV used to correct variations in transfection efficiency. As a control, cells were transfected with 1 μg of either pA3-Luc or pGL3 (Promega) reporters. Cells were cotransfected with 300 ng of TAM-67 or A-Fos when indicated. The total amount of transfected DNA was standardized by adding empty vectors. Cells were then starved in serum-free medium for 24 h and treated with MPA during 18 h, or were left untreated. Fugene HD transfection reagent technique (Roche Diagnostics Corporation, Indianapolis, IN, USA) was performed as described [9]. Transfected cells were lysed and luciferase assays were carried out using the Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Transfection efficiencies were evaluated using the pEGFP-N1 vector (BD Biosciences Clontech, Palo Alto, CA, USA) as we already described [9]. Triplicate samples were analyzed for each datum point. Differences between experimental groups were analyzed by ANOVA followed by Tukey’s test between groups. siRNAs sequences are detailed under Supplemental methods (see Additional file 1). Transfection of siRNAs was performed by using the DharmaFECT transfection reagent (Dharmacon, Lafayatte, CO, USA) for two days following the manufacturer’s instructions.

Immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy in cell cultures

Techniques were performed as we already described [9]. Cells were analyzed using a laser microscopy system (Nikon, Tokyo, Japan) [9]. We performed quantitative analysis of confocal immunofluorescence images with Image J [33] to evaluate the percentages of c-Jun and c-Fos localized in the nucleus and cytosol. The nuclear compartment was defined according to the DAPI images. We obtained an integrated intensity value for total c-Jun (c-JunT) or c-Fos (c-FosT) and for nuclear c-Jun (c-JunN) or c-Fos (c-FosN) for each selected cell. Green channel background (median) was subtracted in all cases. To compute the distribution of c-Jun and c-Fos, we calculated the ratio of the integrated intensities of c-JunN/c-JunT or of c-FosN/c-FosT for 50 to 80 cells and obtained an average value.

In situ proximity ligation assay (PLA)

PLA was performed using the Duolink kit (Olink Biosciences, Uppsala, Sweden). Rabbit PLA PLUS and mouse PLA MINUS probes were then incubated at 37°C for 1 h followed by ligation, rolling circle amplification and detection, according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

Bioinformatics inference of transcription factor binding sites

Transcription factors motif sequence analysis was performed using MAST [34] and FIMO [35] tools on the −3015 to +1570 region of the human Cyclin D1 gene (GenBank AC Z29078), which contains the cyclin D1 promoter. The AP-1 motif (MA0099.2) was downloaded from JASPAR [36] and the STAT3 motif (M00225) from TRANSFAC [37]. ErbB-2 binding motif (HAS) has already been described [38]. Our previous bioinformatics analysis did not identify HAS sites in the −3015 to +1570 cyclin D1 region [9]. PRE motif identified by Clarke and Graham [39], using MEME-chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) [40], from peaks associated with top regulated genes in T47D cells stimulated with progestin, was obtained from the authors. MAST identifies putative binding site positions and calculates a position P-value for every motif match, being the position P-value the probability of at least a single random subsequence of the length of the motif, scoring as well as the observed match. FIMO was used to double-check the identified binding positions and to obtain a q-value for every motif occurrence, which is defined as the false discovery rate if the occurrence is accepted as significant.

ChIP and sequential ChIP assays and real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR)

ChIP and sequential ChIP were performed as we already described [9]. Chromatin was sonicated to an average of about 200 bp. Primers used for qPCR are listed in the Supplemental methods (see Additional file 1).

RNA preparation and real-time quantitative RT-PCR

RNA was obtained and cyclin D1 mRNA levels were detected as we already described [9]. Primers used for qPCR are listed in the Supplemental methods (see Additional file 1).

Preclinical models

C4HD cells were transiently transfected with the indicated expression vectors and 106 cells from each experimental group were inoculated subcutaneously (s.c.) into animals treated with a 40-mg MPA depot in the flank opposite to the cell inoculum. Tumor volume, growth rate and growth delay were determined as previously described [9]. Comparison of tumor volumes between the different groups was done by analysis of variance followed by Tukey’s test among groups. Linear regression analysis was performed on tumor growth curves, and the slopes were compared using analysis of variance followed by a parallelism test to evaluate the statistical significance of differences.

Immunofluorescence detection of PR and p-c-Jun in tumor samples

Antigen retrieval was performed by immersing the sections in 10 mM sodium citrate buffer pH 6 and microwaving at high power for four minutes. Slides were blocked in Modified Hank’s Buffer (MHB) with 5% bovine serum albumin for 30 minutes and were incubated overnight at 4°C with the following primary antibodies: phospho-c-jun (Ser 63/73, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) and monoclonal mouse anti-human Progesterone Receptor, clone PgR 1294 (DAKO, Glostrup, Denmark). Slides were then incubated with the corresponding Alexa 488-conjugated antibody (1:1000, Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR, USA). Reduction of the autofluorescent background was performed by incubation with Sudan Black B 0.1% (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Nuclei were stained with propidium iodide or DAPI (4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole). Negative controls were carried out with MHB instead of primary antibodies. C4HD tumors from the model of mammary tumors induced by progestins were also used as controls [9]. Slides were independently scored by two pathologists (PG and EM). Score discrepancies were re-evaluated and reconciled on a two-headed microscope. A third pathologist (JCR) participated in IF staining and evaluation. PR expression levels detected by IF were scored in accordance to the “Allred score” routinely used for PR detection by IHC in the clinic [41]. Nuclear p-c-Jun levels detected by IF were also scored by the Allred system, considering both the percentage of positive cells and staining intensity. In brief, a score was assigned according to the proportion of stained tumor cells (0 = none; 1 <1/100; 2 = 1/100 to <1/10; 3 = 1/10 to <1/3; 4 = 1/3 to 2/3; 5 = >2/3). Intensity of staining was assigned a score of 0 (none), 1 (weak), 2 (intermediate) and 3 (strong). Percentage and intensity scores were added to obtain a total score that ranged from 0 to 8.

Statistics

Analyses were performed using STATA version 11 software (Stata Corp., College Station, TX, USA). Correlations between categorical variables were performed using the χ2-test or Fisher’s exact test. Cumulative overall survival probabilities were calculated according to the Kaplan-Meier method, and statistical significance was analyzed by log-rank test. Multivariate analysis was performed using the Cox multiple hazards model. Adjustment for significant confounders was done to avoid increased bias and variability or unreliable confidence interval coverage [42]. Variables included in the Cox model were those which resulted in statistically significance (P <0.05) in the log rank test (lymph node metastasis, distant metastasis, ER and clinical stage). The remaining variables were excluded from our analysis (age, tumor size and tumor grade). All tests of statistical significance were two-sided. P-values <0.05 were regarded as statistically significant. Guidelines for reporting tumor markers (REMARK) were used as outlined (see Additional file 1: Table S1).

Results

MPA induces the rapid phosphorylation of c-Jun and c-Fos and AP-1 transcriptional activation via p42/p44 MAPKs

We first explored the ability of the synthetic progestin medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) to phosphorylate c-Jun and c-Fos. We used human breast cancer cell lines and C4HD epithelial cells from the model of mammary carcinogenesis induced by MPA in mice. C4HD cells display high levels of ER and PR and overexpress ErbB-2 [9]. c-Jun phosphorylation was studied using an antibody which recognizes phospho Ser 63/73. c-Fos phosphorylation was first explored by the presence of the upper band in the Western blots revealed with total c-Fos antibodies [18]. MPA treatment of C4HD and T47D human breast cancer cells resulted in rapid phosphorylation of c-Jun and c-Fos, which was abolished by pre-incubation with the antiprogestin RU486 or by knockdown of PR expression with PR small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) (Figure  1A, B and Additional file 1: Figure 1A). We found no effects of MPA in the PR-null T47D-Y cells, confirming the involvement of the classical PR (Figure  1B). Transient transfection of T47D-Y cells with a wild-type PR-B expression vector (T47D-Y-PR-B), but not with a PR-A vector (T47D-Y-PR-A), restored MPA effects (Figure  1B). Blockade of MPA-induced p42/p44 MAPKs activation with U0126 for the first time revealed their involvement in progestin-induced phosphorylation of c-Jun and c-Fos (Figure  1C and Additional file 1: Figure 1B). Transfection of T47D-Y cells with a mutant PR-BmPro unable to activate p42/p44 MAPKs ( [4] and Additional file 1: Figure 1C) abolished MPA effects, further demonstrating that progestin rapid action mediates c-Jun and c-Fos phosphorylation (Figure  1D). On the other hand, transfection of T47D-Y cells with a transcriptionally crippled PR-B (C587A) [32], which retains the capacity to induce p42/p44 MAPKs activation [4,5], restored MPA effects (Figure  1D). As we previously showed [5], levels of PR-B expression in cells transfected with PR-BmPro and C587A-PR mutants were comparable to those in T47D cells (Figure  1D). Similar results of MPA regulation of c-Fos phosphorylation were observed using an antibody which recognizes phosphorylated c-Fos (Additional file 1: Figure 1D to F). Importantly, we have previously shown that RU486 did not modify basal p42/p44 MAPKs activation state in C4HD or T47D-Y-PR-B cells [5] and here we found neither RU486 effects in T47D cells (not shown).

MPA induces PR and AP-1 nuclear colocalization

Quantification of immunofluorescence staining in the absence of MPA treatment showed that the majority of c-Jun (69 ± 1%) localizes in the nuclear compartment of T47D cells with some staining observed in the cytoplasm (31 ± 1%) (Figure  2A). After MPA stimulation, only nuclear c-Jun was observed (Figure  2A). Abrogation of MPA-induced c-Jun phosphorylation with U0126 inhibited the massive nuclear translocation of c-Jun (Figure  2A), indicating that phosphorylation is involved in MPA stimulation of c-Jun migration. MPA also induced nuclear colocalization of c-Jun and PR, as shown by the yellow foci in the merged images (Figure  2A). Cells treated with U0126 showed no nuclear colocalization of c-Jun and PR, evidencing that c-Jun phosphorylation is mandatory for its nuclear interaction with PR. Our quantitative immunofluorescence analysis revealed both nuclear (30 ± 2%) and cytoplasmic (70 ± 2%) c-Fos in untreated cells where MPA stimulation resulted in significant c-Fos migration to the nucleus, abolished by U0126 (Figure  2A). MPA also causes nuclear colocalization of c-Fos with PR, which was abrogated by U0126 (Figure  2A). Moreover, subcellular fractionation studies showed that MPA significantly increased nuclear c-Jun and c-Fos presence and phosphorylation levels (Additional file 1: Figure 2). To further demonstrate the nuclear association of c-Jun and c-Fos with PR we used a proximity ligation assay (PLA), which showed PR/c-Jun and PR/c-Fos interaction only in cells treated with MPA (Figure  2B).

MPA modulates cyclin D1 expression via AP-1

We chose Cyclin D1 as a model gene to explore AP-1 involvement in nonclassical PR transcriptional mechanisms. The complex cyclin D1 proximal promoter contains an AP-1 response element (TRE), mapped in humans at position −954 [14]. We investigated whether MPA regulates the transcriptional activity of cyclin D1 promoter via induction of AP-1 binding to its response element. C4HD and T47D cells were transiently transfected with a 1,745-bp human cyclin D1 promoter luciferase construct containing the −954 TRE. MPA significantly increased cyclin D1 promoter activity, which was abrogated by RU486 (Figure  3A). Consistent with our findings that MPA induces c-Jun and c-Fos phosphorylation and consequent AP-1 transcriptional activity via p42/p44 MAPKs, pretreatment of cells with U0126 abolished MPA effects (Figure  3A). These results are in accordance with previous findings demonstrating that progestin induction of cyclin D1 expression at mRNA level requires PR activation of p42/p22 MAPKs [43]. We did not find significant effects of either RU486 or U0126 on basal transcriptional activity of the cyclin D1 promoter in our cell models (Figure  3A illustrates results in C4HD cells). Co-transfection with the dominant negative (DN) forms of c-Jun (TAM-67) [29] and c-Fos (A-Fos) [30], previously shown to inhibit AP-1 activity, inhibited MPA effects (Figure  3A), indicating that MPA regulation of cyclin D1 promoter occurs directly via induction of c-Jun and c-Fos binding to the TRE. Mutation of the AP-1 site (−963 mut AP-1), which abolishes AP-1 binding [14], inhibited MPA effects (Figure  3A). No effects of TAM-67 or A-Fos were found on progestin activation of a control PRE-Luc reporter (not shown). In addition, transfection of C4HD and T47D cells with TAM-67 and A-Fos or knockdown of c-Jun and c-Fos expression using siRNAs (Additional file 1: Figure 1G, H) in C4HD cells abrogated MPA-induced cyclin D1 protein expression (Figure  3B,C). MPA induced a 2.5-fold increase of cyclin D1 mRNA expression in C4HD cells which was suppressed by silencing the expression of c-Jun or c-Fos (Figure  3D), confirming both proteins involvement in MPA transcriptional regulation of cyclin D1.

In vivo AP-1 and PR co-recruitment to the cyclin D1 promoter

To assess whether PR tethers to AP-1 in the proximal cyclin D1 promoter, we performed ChIP assays. First, we conducted a bioinformatics analysis to investigate the presence of PREs, previously identified in T47D cells [39], using MAST [34] and FIMO [35] with default parameters. This analysis on the −3015 to +1570 region of the human Cyclin D1 gene, containing the cyclin D1 promoter, did not detect significant PREs. In order to discard any possibility of a direct PR binding to DNA at this region, we also used the weak matches option (−w) of MAST and FIMO tools. Using this option, we only identified a weak/absent putative PRE (position P-value = 0.00031, q-value = 0.742) located 114 bp downstream from the TRE we are studying here. These studies indicate that PR recruitment to the region of the cyclin D1 promoter under study would not occur via direct binding to its response elements in the chromatin. Our findings in C4HD cells using primers flanking the −948 mouse TRE site showed a significant MPA-induced binding of c-Jun, c-Fos, and PR to the cyclin D1 promoter after 30 minutes of treatment (Figure  4A). Similar results were found in T47D cells (Figure  4A). MPA-induced phosphorylation of c-Fos and c-Jun via p42/p44 MAPKs is mandatory for both proteins loading at the TRE site of the cyclin D1 promoter, as shown by the lack of recruitment of said proteins in T47D cells pretreated with U0126 (Figure  4A). As expected for a PR tethering transcriptional mechanism, in the absence of AP-1 binding to the cyclin D1 promoter in cells treated with U0126, PR is not recruited to this site upon MPA stimulation (Figure  4A). Our results using a sequential ChIP showed that c-Jun, c-Fos and PR co-occupy cyclin D1 promoter after 30 minutes stimulation with MPA (Figure  4B). To further demonstrate that a functional transcriptional complex between AP-1 and PR is involved in MPA-induced cyclin D1 promoter activation and protein expression, we used the C587A-PR mutant. Previous findings [32], as well as our own work [9], showed that C587A-PR is unable to tether to other transcription factors. Consistent with our results showing that MPA induces the phosphorylation of c-Jun and c-Fos in T47D-Y-C587A-PR cells (Figure  1D), we observed the recruitment of both proteins to the TRE site of cyclin D1 promoter; however, C587A-PR was not loaded at this promoter (Figure  4C). In the absence of the assembly of the AP-1/PR complex, MPA induced neither cyclin D1 promoter activation nor cyclin D1 protein expression (Figure  4D, E).

Transcriptional interaction among AP-1, Stat3, PR and ErbB-2 at the cyclin D1 promoter

Our earlier work revealed that MPA induces the rapid phosphorylation of Stat3 and ErbB-2 in breast cancer cells and the assembly of a transcriptional complex between Stat3 and ErbB-2 at the Stat3 binding sites (GAS) in human (position −984) and mouse (positons −971 and −874) cyclin D1 promoters [9]. These sites are close to the murine −948 TRE (corresponding to the −954 TRE in the human cyclin D1 promoter) (Figure  5A, upper diagram). Stat3 and AP-1 binding sites are located near or even juxtaposed in the promoters of a series of genes and cooperative transcriptional interaction between Stat3, c-Jun and c-Fos has been found at the promoters of several Stat3-induced genes [44-46]. We here explored whether AP-1 and Stat3 interact at the cyclin D1 promoter. We found that upon 30 minutes of MPA stimulation of C4HD and T47D cells, Stat3 is loaded at the region of cyclin D1 proximal promoter containing TRE and GAS sites, along with c-Jun, c-Fos and PR (Figure  5A, first and sixth panels). As we recently described [9], MPA also induces the recruitment of ErbB-2 to this region (Figure  5A, first and sixth panels). Knockdown of c-Jun or c-Fos expression with siRNAs in C4HD cells and abolishment of AP-1 transcriptional activity by transfection of TAM-67 or A-Fos in T47D cells abrogated MPA-induced loading of Stat3 to the cyclin D1 promoter (Figure  5A, second, third, seventh and eighth panels). ErbB-2 was not loaded at the cyclin D1 promoter in the absence of c-Jun or c-Fos presence at said promoter by knockdown of their expressions with siRNAs (Figure  5A, second and third panels), or when we inhibit c-Jun or c-Fos transcriptional activity by transfecting cells with TAM-67 or A-Fos (Figure  5A, seventh and eighth panels). As mentioned above, both strategies abolished Stat3 recruitment to the cyclin D1 promoter (Figure  5A, second, third, seventh and eighth panels). This result is consistent with our previous findings demonstrating that ErbB-2 is recruited to the cyclin D1 promoter, which our previous studies demonstrated that lacks ErbB-2 binding sites (HAS), via tethering to Stat3 loaded at the GAS sites [9]. Controls (see Additional file 1: Figure 1) show that silencing of c-Jun or c-Fos expressions had no effect on total levels of Stat3, ErbB-2, and PR protein expressions. To inhibit ErbB-2 nuclear presence, we transfected cells with a human ErbB-2 nuclear localization domain mutant (hErbB-2ΔNLS) unable to translocate to the nucleus [31], and which we previously found acts as a DN inhibitor of endogenous ErbB-2 nuclear translocation [9]. As we reported [9], Stat3 binds to this region of the promoter in cells expressing the hErbB-2ΔNLS but PR is not recruited (Figure  5A, fifth and ninth panels). We now found that in the absence of ErbB-2 loading, c-Jun and c-Fos are still bound at this region of cyclin D1 promoter (Figure  5A, fifth and ninth panels). In addition, sequential ChIPs showed that c-Jun, c-Fos and ErbB2 co-occupy cyclin D1 promoter after MPA stimulation (Figure  5B). Our previous re-ChIP studies demonstrated also the co-recruitment of PR and ErbB-2 to this region of the cyclin D1 promoter upon stimulation of T47D cells with MPA [9]. To gain insight into the function of this cooperative transcriptional interaction, we examined the local chromatin architecture. Since histone acetylation positively correlates with active gene transcription, we investigated whether co-activators with chromatin remodeling activity, such as p300 and CBP, were recruited to the region of the cyclin D1 promoter containing the TRE and GAS sites. As shown in Figure  5C (first and fifth panels), CBP and p300 were loaded in this region by MPA treatment of C4HD and T47D cells. Consistently, histone H3 and H4 acetylation was significantly enhanced by MPA (Figure  5C, first and fifth panels). Abrogation of the recruitment of AP-1 and Stat3 to their respective binding sites and consequent blockade of cofactors (PR and ErbB-2) binding (Figure  5C second to fourth, sixth and seventh panels) resulted in neither CBP/p300 recruitment nor modification of histone acetylation levels. Similarly, in spite of Stat3 and AP-1 binding to their response elements in cells transfected with hErbB-2ΔNLS, in the absence of ErbB-2 and PR loading no markers of chromatin activation were found (Figure  5C, eighth panel). Our findings for the first time reveal the bidirectional nature of the transcriptional interaction between AP-1 and Stat3 and their interacting cofactors, PR and ErbB-2, which function in the manner of an enhanceosome, that is, an array of transcription factors (AP-1 and Stat3), whose response elements are clustered in the DNA, plus their interacting cofactors (PR and ErbB-2) and co-activators (P300 and CBP) that function cooperatively, in this case to induce cyclin D1 promoter activation upon progestin stimulation of breast cancer cells.

A multimeric AP-1/Stat3/PR/ErbB-2 transcriptional complex drives progestin-induced in vitro and in vivo breast cancer growth

To explore the involvement of AP-1 in progestin-induced breast cancer growth, we transiently transfected C4HD cells with a p-Flag vector (C4HD-p-Flag) as control, with TAM-67 (C4HD-TAM-67) or A-Fos (C4HD-A-Fos), and also co-transfected them with TAM-67 and A-Fos (C4HD-TAM-67/A-Fos). Our studies using [3H]-thymidine incorporation as a measure of DNA synthesis, showed that C4HD-TAM-67 and C4HD-A-Fos cells were unresponsive to MPA proliferative effects (Figure  6A). Importantly, we previously demonstrated that [3H]-thymidine uptake correlates with the number of cells/well in the C4HD model [2], a direct measure of cell proliferation. Consistent with c-Jun and c-Fos function as a heterodimer to assemble the AP-1 transcription factor [15] and with our present findings revealing that both are directly involved in MPA-induced AP-1 transcriptional activation (Figure  3), we found comparable levels of inhibition of MPA-induced growth in C4HD-TAM-67/A-Fos cells to those observed in C4HD-TAM-67 and C4HD-A-Fos cells. Similar results were found in T47D cells (Figure  6B). These findings reveal that AP-1 activation is mandatory for progestin-driven breast cancer cell growth. On the other hand, we recently found that transfection of C4HD cells with the hErbB-2ΔNLS (C4HD-hErbB-2ΔNLS) renders them unresponsive to in vitro and in vivo growth stimulated by progestin [9]. Importantly, previous findings and our own work demonstrated that hErbB-2ΔNLS retains its intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity as well as the capacity to activate classical ErbB-2 cascades, and does not affect endogenous ErbB-2 signaling [9,31]. In light of our present findings showing the assembly of an AP-1/Stat3/PR/ErbB-2 enhanceosome at the cyclin D1 promoter, we explored the effects in proliferation of the simultaneous blockade of ErbB-2 nuclear localization and AP-1 activation. Co-transfection with either TAM-67 or A-Fos and hErbB-2ΔNLS into C4HD cells (C4HD-TAM-67/hErbB-2ΔNLS and C4HD-A-Fos/hErbB-2ΔNLS, respectively) resulted in levels of growth inhibition comparable to those observed in C4HD-TAM-67 and C4HD-A-Fos cells (Figure  6A). No significant effects on basal cell proliferation were observed by transfection with any of the expression plasmids or the combination of them (Figure  6A, B) In accordance with the similar effects on growth inhibition observed in our different experimental approaches designed to abolish the assembly of the AP-1/Stat3/PR/ErbB-2 enhanceosome, comparable levels of blockade of cyclin D1 expression were found in all six cell types (Figure  6C). Proliferation in C4HD cells was also evaluated by propidium iodide staining and flow cytometry analysis with similar results (Additional file 1: Figure 3A).

We then developed a preclinical model to address the effect of the blockade of AP-1 activation and of the simultaneous abrogation of AP-1 activity and ErbB-2 nuclear translocation in in vivo growth using the C4HD mouse mammary tumor model. Here, 106 C4HD-p-Flag, C4HD-TAM-67, C4HD-A-Fos, C4HD-hErbB-2ΔNLS and C4HD-TAM-67/hErbB-2ΔNLS cells were inoculated s.c. into mice treated with MPA. All mice (n = 6) injected with control C4HD-p-Flag cells developed tumors which became palpable after seven days of inoculation. Only four out of six mice injected with C4HD-TAM-67, C4HD-A-Fos and C4HD-hErbB-2ΔNLS cells developed tumors with a delay of four days in tumor latency compared with tumors from C4HD-p-Flag cells. In mice injected with C4HD-TAM-67/hErbB-2ΔNLS cells, three out of six developed tumors with a delay of seven days in latency as compared to the control group. Tumor mean volumes and growth rates (Figure  6D-E) from all experimental groups were significantly lower than those from the controls. Notably, the mean volumes and growth rates of tumors from C4HD-TAM-67/hErbB-2ΔNLS cells were also significantly lower than those of tumors from C4HD-TAM-67, C4HD-A-Fos and C4HD-hErbB-2ΔNLS cells (Figure  6E). Here we are describing a representative experiment of a total of two. Tumors were excised at Day 27 and the results are summarized in Figure  6E and Additional file 1: Figure 3B. It is of note that the C4HD tumor model is absolutely dependent on the administration of MPA for growing in vivo[47-49], therefore, no tumors developed in mice injected with C4HD-p-Flag cells in the absence of MPA administration after 27 days of inoculation. Next, we examined the AP-1 functional state in tumor samples in order to provide a direct mechanistic link between AP-1 transcriptional activity and MPA-induced in vivo growth. ChIP analysis showed c-Jun recruitment to the region of cyclin D1 promoter containing TRE and GAS sites in C4HD-p-Flag tumors (Figure  6F). On the contrary, we did not detect c-Jun loading in C4HD-TAM-67, C4HD-A-Fos or C4HD-TAM-67/hErbB-2ΔNLS tumors (Figure  6F). Low levels of c-Jun binding were found in C4HD-hErbB-2ΔNLS tumors (Figure  6F), consistent with our studies in cells, which, however, showed no markers of chromatin activation at this region (Figure  5A, C). In accordance with our demonstration that the AP-1/Stat3/PR/ErbB-2 complex assembled at the cylin D1 promoter upon MPA stimulation modulates cyclin D1 expression, significantly lower levels of cyclin D1 were found in tumors from all experimental groups as compared with control samples (Figure  6G). These results provide the first direct link among AP-1 and Stat3 cooperative transcriptional activity, cyclin D1 expression, and in vivo progestin-induced breast cancer growth. In line with previous findings revealing that TAM-67 and A-Fos act at the level of AP-1 transcriptional activity [29,30], we found similar levels of c-Jun phosphorylation in tumors from all experimental groups (Figure  6G). Moreover, and as a further demonstration that indeed the transcriptional effects of Stat3, PR and ErbB-2 govern cyclin D1 expression and in vivo progestin-induced breast cancer growth, comparable Stat3 phosphorylation levels and ErbB-2 phosphorylation at one of the major sites of autophosphorylation, Tyr 1272, as well as at Tyr 877, a site other than the autophosphorylation ones, which we already revealed is rapidly phosphorylated by progestins [9], were detected in all tumors (Figure  6G). Also, p42/p44 MAPKs, downstream effectors of PR and ErbB-2, were comparably activated in all experimental groups (Figure  6G). Similar levels of PR were found in all tumor samples, indicating that the antiproliferative effects of the blockade of AP-1 activation, and consequently of the assembly of the AP-1/Stat3/PR/ErbB-2 transcriptional complex, are not due to regulation of PR expression levels, but to the blockade of the assembly of PR nonclassical transcriptional complexes (Figure  6G).

Association of phosphorylated c-Jun and PR nuclear colocalization with risk factors and clinical outcome in breast cancer

To explore the clinical significance of PR and AP-1 nuclear interaction, we conducted a retrospective study in a cohort of 99 PR + primary invasive breast carcinomas. The clinical and pathological characteristics of these specimens are shown (Additional file 1: Table S2). We studied the nuclear colocalization of PR and phosphorylated c-Jun (p-c-Jun) in TMAs from our cohort by immunofluorescence (IF) and confocal microscopy. PR expression in the TMAs was explored by IF using PgR 1294 antibody and its levels were scored in accordance with the Allred score [41]. We analyzed p-c-Jun expression by IF using the Ser 63/73 antibody, as in our experimental models. Nuclear p-c-Jun levels detected by IF were also scored with the Allred system, considering both the percentage of positive cells and staining intensity, on a scale of 0 to 8. As previously described [50], substantial levels of nuclear p-c-Jun by IF staining were found in our cohort, where all tumors displayed scores between 5 and 8. Representative samples are shown in Figure  7A. We then established a score for nuclear colocalization of PR and p-c-Jun in which 0 represents faint or no colocalization in less than 10% of cells, 1+ weak colocalization in 10 to 25%, 2+ moderate colocalization in 26 to 50%, and 3+ strong colocalization in >50% of cells (Figure  7A). Scores of 2+ and 3+ were considered positive for colocalization. We found that 81 tumors (82%, 95% CI = 73% to 89%) showed nuclear colocalization. Next, we evaluated the relationship between p-c-Jun and PR colocalization and the clinicopathological characteristics of our cohort, and found that it was significantly associated with the absence of nodal metastasis (Table  1). Kaplan-Meier survival analysis revealed that colocalization correlated with better OS (Figure  7B). Finally, multivariate analysis revealed that p-c-Jun/PR colocalization is a significant independent predictor of better survival (HR: 0.32, 95% CI: 0.12 to 0.85, P = 0.022). This was an unexpected finding given our results indicating that the assembly of the PR/AP-1 complex drives progestin-stimulated breast cancer growth. To reconcile these discrepancies, and based on previous findings showing that PR activation of signaling cascades and proliferative effects in breast cancer may occur via PR crosstalk with ERα [3,51,52], we reasoned that the assembly of the PR/AP-1 complex might be involved in the response to therapy, which currently targets ERα. To test our hypothesis, we explored the OS in the subgroup of patients ER+/PR + (n = 85) that received tamoxifen (Tam), a selective ER modulator (SERM), in the adjuvant setting. We found that among patients that received Tam, those whose tumors displayed nuclear colocalization of p-c-Jun and PR showed a significantly higher OS than patients whose tumors lacked colocalization (Figure  7B). Comparable mean and range of p-c-Jun and PR scores were found in both sets (Additional file 1: Tables S3 A, B). Membrane ErbB-2 overexpression is associated with poor clinical outcome in ER+/PR + patients treated with Tam [10,53-56]. Our findings revealed that ErbB-2 overexpression was inversely associated with p-c-Jun and PR colocalization in our Tam-treated cohort, which further highlights the role of p-c-Jun/PR colocalization as a biomarker of response to Tam (Additional file 1: Table S4). To explore a causal relationship between Tam effects and the assembly of the PR/AP-1 complex, we went back to our experimental models. We treated cells with Tam at a concentration (1 μM) in which it acts as antagonist on ERα actions, and which, therefore, mimics the expected response to Tam in patients [3,57-60]. We found that Tam abrogated progestin-induced growth of T47D cells (Figure  8A, left panel) and also inhibited MPA-induced c-Jun phosphorylation and AP-1-mediated transcriptional activation of the cyclin D1 promoter (Figure  8A, middle and right panels, respectively). No effects on basal cell growth, c-Jun phosphorylation or AP-1 activation were detected by treatment with Tam alone (Figure  8A). Consistent with our findings that c-Jun phosphorylation is mandatory for it to load at the cyclin D1 promoter (Figure  4), we found that Tam inhibited c-Jun binding to said region (Figure  8B). As we showed above (Figures  4 and 5), in the absence of c-Jun binding, PR is not recruited to the promoter (Figure  8B). To further assess Tam’s role on progestin-mediated PR/AP-1 complex formation and breast cancer growth, we used BT474 breast cancer cells which express ERα and PR, overexpress ErbB-2, and are fully resistant to Tam antiproliferative effects [61]. In addition, we used a BT474-HR clone which we selected for its resistance to the effects of the ErbB-2 antibody trastuzumab, employed for treatment of ErbB-2-positive breast cancer (Additional file 1: Figure 4A) and the BT474-HR6 clone selected for its resistance to trastuzumab in a previous work [27]. Estrogen-driven growth was found to be inhibited by Tam in BT474 clones resistant to trastuzumab [61], suggesting a reactivation of ERα dominant role in the proliferation of these cells. As described for 17-β estradiol (E2) ( [61] and Figure  8C), we found that Tam abrogated MPA-induced proliferation of BT474-HR cells (Figure  8C) but it does not affect their basal proliferation (Figure  8C). Similarly, MPA-driven growth was inhibited by Tam in BT474-HR6 cells (Additional file 1: Figure 4B). MPA also induced growth of BT474 parental cells which remained unaffected by Tam (Figure  8D). As control of the classically defined Tam-resistant behavior of BT474 cells [61], we are showing that Tam does not inhibit their E2-induced growth and, that when added alone, Tam shows agonistic actions (Figure  8D). As previously reported, similar levels of ErbB-2 and ERα were found in BT474 cells and in HR and HR6 clones (Figure  8E) [27,61,62]. On the contrary, we found lower levels of PR expression in HR and HR6 clones as compared to parental BT474 cells, which has previously been observed in BT474 and UACC812 breast cancer cells and their respective trastuzumab-resistant clones [62]. PR activation of the c-Src/p42/p44MAPKs pathway occurs in ERα-dependent and -independent manners [3-5,51]. Here, we found that MPA induced a rapid increase in the phosphorylation of c-Src and p42/p44MAPKs in BT474-HR cells, which was abrogated by Tam (Figure  8F). No effects were observed by treatment with Tam alone (Figure  8F). MPA also induced phosphorylation of c-Jun in these cells, which was abolished by preventing c-Src/p42/p44MAPKs activation when Tam was added along with MPA (Figure  8F). Tam alone had no effect on c-Jun phosphorylation (Figure  8F). Most interesting are our results with BT474 parental cells. High levels of basal c-Src, p42/p44MAPKs and c-Jun phosphorylation were found in these cells which were enhanced by MPA (Figure  8G). Tam increased MPA-induced phosphorylation of all these proteins (Figure  8G). Also, Tam exerted a clear agonist action in BT474 cells, stimulating c-Src, p42/p44MAPKs and c-Jun activation (Figure  8G). Inhibition of p42/p44MAPKs activity with UO126 in BT474-HR and BT474 cells also resulted in complete blockade of MPA-induced c-Jun phosphorylation (Additional file 1: Figure 5), demonstrating the direct involvement of p42/p44MAPKs in MPA effects. We then explored the involvement of the nuclear interaction between c-Jun and PR in the response to Tam. MPA induced the recruitment of c-Jun and PR to the cyclin D1 promoter in BT474-HR cells, which was abrogated by Tam (Figure  8H). No loading of said proteins was observed by stimulation with Tam alone (Figure  8H). Differential nuclear interaction of ERα with co-activators and co-repressors plays a key role in Tam response [53,63-65]. Therefore, we explored whether ERα may also be recruited along with c-Jun and PR to the cyclin D1 promoter. We found that MPA induced ERα recruitment to said promoter region, which was abrogated by Tam (Figure  8H). Tam alone did not stimulate ERα binding (Figure  8H). Since our database [66] and literature searches did not identify canonical or half estrogen response elements (EREs) in the cyclin D1 promoter target region under study, our results indicate that ERα acts as an AP-1 cofactor, along with PR. Our findings in BT474 cells revealed high levels of basal c-Jun recruitment to the cyclin D1 promoter, which were increased by MPA (Figure  8I). Tam also significantly increased MPA-induced c-Jun loading at said promoter (Figure  8I), and when added alone, it stimulated c-Jun binding. In addition, MPA and Tam stimulated PR recruitment to the cyclin D1 promoter (Figure  8I), and Tam potentiated MPA capacity to recruit PR (Figure  8I). Neither MPA nor Tam nor their combination induced ERα loading at this region of the promoter. Control of c-Fos co-recruitment with c-Jun and PR to the cyclin D1 promoter to assemble the AP-1/PR complex in BT474-HR cells is shown in Additional file 1: Figure 6. Our findings also demonstrated that MPA-induced cyclin D1 protein expression in BT474-HR cells was abolished by Tam, which on the other hand, caused no effect on cyclin D1 levels when acting alone (Figure  8J). In contrast, Tam enhanced cyclin D1 expression induced by MPA, and also increased cyclin D1 levels when added alone in BT474 cells (Figure  8J). We performed IF staining in BT474-HR and BT474 cells to compare the images on the subcellular localization of PR and p-c-Jun with our findings in the clinic. BT474 cells, growing in the absence of MPA, displayed high levels of nuclear PR (7+) and p-c-Jun (8+) (Figure  9). However, they would classify as 1+ in our clinical nuclear p-c-Jun/PR colocalization score, mimicking a tumor negative for colocalization (Figure  9). MPA and Tam and their combination stimulate nuclear colocalization of both proteins (Figure  9), with scores of 2+ or 3+. BT474-HR cells without MPA treatment show scores of 5+ to 6+ for nuclear PR expression, 8+ for p-c-Jun and no protein colocalization (Figure  9). In contrast with the almost exclusive nuclear localization of PR in BT474 cells, we found the presence of cytoplasmic PR in BT474-HR cells (Figure  9). The image is strikingly different upon MPA stimulation, which results in significant nuclear migration of PR (7+) and colocalization with p-c-Jun (3+) (Figure  9). Tam had no effects on nuclear p-c-Jun and PR colocalization and abrogated MPA effects (Figure  9). These findings revealed that IF images of BT474 cells in the absence of MPA stimulation and of BT474-HR cells treated with MPA, mimic the respective portraits of Tam-resistant and -sensitive tumors, which we revealed using PR and c-Jun colocalization as biomarker.

Discussion

Our findings demonstrate that coordinated PR rapid and nonclassical transcriptional effects govern breast cancer growth and offer novel mechanistic insight into one of the major challenges in the clinical management of breast cancer: endocrine therapy resistance.

We showed that MPA induces phosphorylation of c-Jun and c-Fos and AP-1 transcriptional activation in breast tumor cells via PR-activated p42/p44 MAPKs. MPA effects were mediated by PR-B but not by PR-A, which contributes to explain the fact that in breast cancer the majority of the target genes are exclusively regulated through one isoform or the other, principally through PR-B [67]. Progestin rapidly activates p42/p44 MAPKs in breast cancer which mediate multiple aspects of PR function [1,8]. We revealed that the capacity of progestin-activated p42/p44 MAPKs to phosphorylate c-Jun and c-Fos is an integration point of PR rapid and nonclassical transcriptional mechanisms.

Cyclin D1 is a paradigmatic gene induced by progestin in breast cancer [8,9,11]. A link among PR, AP-1 and cyclin D1 was provided by the demonstration that in progestin-stimulated breast cancer cells, PR and c-Jun are recruited to an estrogen-sensitive region at the proximal cyclin D1 promoter which contains the AP-1 site [68]. We previously found that progestin induces Cyclin D1 expression via the assembly of a transcriptional complex between Stat3 and ErbB-2 at the GAS sites of the proximal cyclin D1 promoter [9]. Our present findings revealed a new level of complexity in this mechanism showing that AP-1 is also loaded at the TRE located in close proximity to the GAS site in said promoter, and that PR is simultaneously recruited. Cooperative transcriptional interaction between Stat3, c-Jun and c-Fos has been reported at the promoters of several Stat3-induced genes, including some involved in carcinogenesis and metastasis [44-46]. Here, we show the assembly of a complex of TFs (Stat3 and AP-1) and their interacting cofactors (PR and ErbB-2) (Figure  10 illustrates our model) which functions cooperatively to induce cyclin D1 promoter activation and breast cancer growth.

Expression of the different AP-1 members and increased AP-1 transcriptional activity were found in breast cancer where AP-1 participates in the regulation of growth, invasion and resistance to Tam [20-22,50,69-71]. Our findings demonstrate that inhibition of AP-1 activity blocks in vitro and in vivo progestin-induced breast tumor growth. Our discovery at the cyclin D1 promoter of the AP-1/Stat3/PR/ErbB-2 enhanceosome, may explain the similar levels of in vitro growth inhibition we found by abrogation of AP-1 activity, preventing nuclear ErbB-2 presence or the combination of both strategies. The output of all three strategies on cyclin D1 expression is in turn the same and appears to directly correlate with the similar levels of in vitro and in vivo growth abrogation observed. In contrast to our in vitro findings, C4HD-TAM-67-hErbB-2ΔNLS tumors showed the lowest proliferative rates among our preclinical models, suggesting that nuclear ErbB-2 modulates genes involved in in vivo breast cancer proliferation, which do not play a key role in in vitro proliferation, independently of the assembly of the AP-1/Stat3/ErbB-2/PR complex. Similar levels of c-Jun, ErbB-2, Stat3 and p42/p44 MAPKs phosphorylation were found in all experimental groups showing that cooperative nuclear function of AP-1, Stat3 and ErbB-2 modulates tumor growth.

A previous study showed that p-c-Jun correlated with p42/p44 MAPKs activation and expression of ErbB ligands and with lack of response to endocrine therapy in breast tumors [50]. These results and our findings provide complementary information. The fact that in our study p-c-Jun/PR colocalization was a marker of increased OS in ER+/PR + patients receiving Tam, while, contrastingly, in the mentioned study nuclear p-c-Jun in ER + tumors correlated with lack of endocrine response [50], can be explained by our combined experimental and clinical data. High levels of nuclear staining for p-c-Jun in BT474 cells in the absence of progestin stimulation, reflect c-Jun activation by the c-Src/p42/p44MAPKs cascade, which is also active under basal conditions. BT474 cells express ErbB ligands, and ErbB tyrosine kinase inhibitors block p42/p44 MAPKs activation in these cells [27,62]. Therefore, we speculate that in BT474 cells, c-Jun is constitutively phosphorylated by endogenous ErbB ligands via p42/p44 MAPKs. On the other hand, previous findings, including our own, showed that p42/p44 MAPKs, activated by ErbB ligands, induce PR phosphorylation and nuclear translocation [72,73], which may explain the extensive PR nuclear presence found when there is no progestin stimulation of BT474 cells. However, under basal conditions, these cells show no nuclear c-Jun/PR colocalization, and in spite of c-Jun loading at the cyclin D1 promoter, PR is not recruited as a cofactor. Our findings on MPA treatment of BT474 cells are consistent with a model of Tam resistance in the clinic where, firstly, exposure to an endogenous progestational milieu, mimicked in our study with MPA, of ER+/PR + tumors displaying at diagnosis p-c-Jun nuclear presence but lacking p-c-Jun/PR colocalization, will enhance p-c-Jun levels and induce the assembly of an AP-1/PR complex and tumor proliferation. Secondly, such as we found in BT474 cells, in this tumor type Tam will enhance high basal levels of activated c-Src/p42/p44MAPKs, consequently increasing c-Jun phosphorylation, AP-1/PR complex formation, and tumor growth. Thirdly, when present together, Tam and progesterone will exert cooperative effects on the assembly of the growth-promoting AP-1/PR complex. ERα genomic actions appear not to be involved in progestin nor Tam effects, as we found no recruitment of ERα to the AP-1/PR transcriptional complex in BT474 cells. This is consistent with previous findings showing that ERα is located mostly at the cytoplasm in BT474 cells, and in several breast cancer cells overexpressing ErbB-2 [61,74]. This ectopic ERα location would therefore prevent Tam antagonistic effects on ERα genomic actions. Ours is the first demonstration that a mechanism underlying Tam resistance is the ability of Tam to assemble an AP-1/PR transcriptional complex at a region of the cyclin D1 proximal promoter lacking canonical or half PREs or EREs, via the cooption of ERα signaling function, independently of ERα recruitment to said complex.

Anti-estrogens and progestin interaction leading to breast cancer growth has been revealed. Progestin was found to induce cyclin D1 expression and proliferation in anti-estrogen-arrested breast cancer cells [75]. Differences in ErbB-2 or ERα levels cannot account for differential Tam responses since we found similar levels of both proteins in BT474 cells, HR and HR6 clones, as already reported [27,61,62]. Our results on the lower PR levels in BT474-HR and HR6 cells, as compared to parental BT474 cells are consistent with previous findings [62]. PR is still clearly expressed in our Tam-responsive cells, with a score that would be considered a PR-positive tumor, which suggests that control of PR levels would result in substantial PR involvement in the formation of transcriptional complexes via its interaction with ERα, which are susceptible to being inhibited by Tam.

Our results in BT474-HR cells revealed that the hallmark of PR role in Tam-sensitive cells is the requirement for PR to crosstalk with unliganded ERα to activate the Src/p42/p44MAPKs cascade leading to c-Jun phosphorylation and AP-1/PR complex formation. We also found that progestin recruits unliganded ERα as a cofactor to the AP-1/PR complex. Blockade of ERα function with Tam therefore inhibits coordinated PR rapid and transcriptional effects leading to tumor growth. A puzzling finding of our work has been that while staining of BT474 cells in the absence of MPA stimulation mimics the portrait of a Tam-resistant tumor we revealed by using PR and c-Jun colocalization as biomarker, staining of BT474-HR cells in the presence of MPA resembles a Tam-sensitive tumor. It is tempting to hypothesize that BT474 cells represent tumors whose proliferation is mostly dependent on growth factors, and that therefore at the time of diagnosis, they will display a hormone-independent profile, regarding the p-c-Jun/PR marker. On the contrary, BT474-HR cells mimic tumors in which the hormonal stimulus is still key in driving growth. Therefore, when detected, this tumor type will show a pattern of p-c-Jun/PR colocalization associated with hormonal control of proliferation.

Studies of differential gene expression between endocrine resistant and responsive breast tumors before and after treatment identified genes that predict response and revealed agonist actions of Tam [76]. Notably, cyclin D1, which we here found is modulated via an AP-1/PR interaction which Tam potentiates in resistant cells, was among the genes whose expression was dramatically increased after treatment only in resistant tumors [76]. Cyclin D1 overexpression in breast cancer is associated with both good outcome [77] and Tam resistance [78]. Our findings revealed a mechanism which links AP-1 activation and induction of cyclin D1 expression to Tam resistance.

Conclusions

Although progestin induces breast cancer growth, PR presence in breast tumors is an independent marker of good prognosis [79], and PR loss in ER + tumors is associated with reduced response to endocrine therapies [79]. We here provided novel insight into the paradox of PR action showing that in spite of a clear function of PR as a major driver of mammary tumor growth, its role as a marker of good prognosis may be explained by our demonstration that in breast cancer cells sensitive to endocrine therapy with Tam, PR must interact with unliganded ERα to exert its rapid and genomic effects leading to the assembly of transcriptional complexes which govern breast cancer growth. Therefore, blockade of ERα function would also inhibit coordinated PR rapid and transcriptional effects, and consequently, PR-mediated proliferation. Our findings have also highlighted the necessity of developing new biomarkers of response to endocrine therapy based on the assessment of surrogates of PR function, such as the nuclear colocalization of PR with p-c-Jun, which our combined studies in the clinic and in cell models identified as a predictor of Tam response. Our mechanistic studies suggest that nuclear presence of PR and p-c-Jun, in the absence of said proteins colocalization, is a hallmark of hormone-independent activation of c-Jun and PR and stimulation of tumor growth, unlikely to respond to ER-targeted therapies.

Abbreviations

A-Fos: Dominant Negative c-Fos expression vector; AJCC: American Joint Committee on Cancer; AP-1: Activator Protein 1; C587A-PR-B: expression vector for a transcriptionally crippled PR-B which retains the capacity to induce p42/p44 MAPKs activation; ChFCS: Charcolized FCS; ChIP: Chromatin Immunoprecipitation; DAPI: 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; DN: Dominant Negative; E2: 17-β estradiol; ER: Estrogen Receptor; EREs: Estrogen Response Elements; FISH: fluorescence in situ hybridization; GAS: Stat3 binding sites; hErbB-2ΔNLS: human ErbB-2 nuclear localization domain mutant; IF: Immunofluorescence; IHC: Immunohistochemistry; JNK: c-Jun N-terminal kinase; MAPKs: Mitogen-activated protein kinases; MHB: Modified Hank’s Buffer; MPA: Medroxyprogesterone acetate; OS: Overall survival; p-c-Jun: phosphorylated c-Jun; PI-3 K: phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; PLA: Proximity Ligation Assay; PR: Progesterone receptor; PR-BmPro: expression vector for a mutant PR-B unable to activate p42/p44 MAPKs; PREs: Progesterone response elements; s.c.: subcutaneously; SERM: Selective ER Modulator; siRNAs: small interfering RNAs; Stat3: Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3; Tam: Tamoxifen; TAM-67: Dominant negative c-Jun expression vector; TF: Transcription factor; TMAs: Tissue microarrays; TRE: cis-tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate-responsive element; UF: Universidad de La Frontera.

Competing interests

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions

PVE and MCDF were responsible for the conception and design of the study. MCDF, PVE, NMG, WB, RS, RV, CJP, RCR, MAR, MT, PG, EM and MFM developed the methodology. MCDF, PVE, NMG, WB, RS, RV, CJP, RCR, MAR, MT, PG, EM, JCR, VP and MFM acquired the data (and also provided animals, acquired and managed patients, provided facilities, and so on). PVE, MCDF, RS, NMG, WB, CJP, RCR, PG, JCR, EM, SM, PY and EHC analyzed and interpreted the data. PVE and MCDF wrote the manuscript. PVE supervised the study. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Supplementary Material

Supplemental data. File contains all supplemental figures, tables and methods cited in this article.. Click here for file 

Figure 1

  to   Cells were pretreated with RU486 or U0126, transfected with PR siRNAs or PR expression vectors and were then treated with MPA. Western blots (WB) were performed with phospho (p)-c-Jun and pp42/44MAPKs antibodies and filters were re-probed with the respective total antibody, or with a c-Fos antibody and re-probed with an actin antibody. Experiments in   to   were repeated five times with similar results. Signal intensities of phospho-proteins were analyzed by densitometry and normalized to total protein bands. Data analysis showed a significant increase in protein phosphorylation by MPA in comparison with untreated cells and a significant inhibition of MPA-induced phosphorylation by RU486 or UO126 (P <0.001). See also Additional file 1: Figure 1. MAPKs, Mitogen-activated protein kinases; MPA, Medroxyprogesterone acetate; PR, Progesterone receptor.

Figure 2

  PR, c-Jun and c-Fos were localized by IF and confocal microscopy. Merged images show MPA-induced c-Jun/PR or c-Fos/PR nuclear colocalization, evidenced by the yellow foci. Boxed areas are shown in detail in the right insets. Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue).   PR/c-Jun and PR/-c-Fos nuclear interactions were detected by in situ PLA. The detected dimers are shown by the fluorescent rolling circle products (red). Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue). The experiments shown were repeated three times with similar results. See also Additional file 1: Figure 2. MPA, Medroxyprogesterone acetate; PLA, Proximity ligation assay; PR, Progesterone receptor.

Figure 3

  Cells were transfected with a cyclin D1 promoter luciferase construct containing the −954 TRE and with a construct with a point mutation in the TRE (−963 mut AP-1). When indicated, cells were co-transfected with TAM-67 or A-Fos and were then treated with MPA or pretreated with RU or U0 before MPA stimulation. As control of PR transcriptional activity cells were transfected with a PRE-Luc plasmid and stimulated with MPA. Results are presented as fold induction of luciferase activity with respect to cells untreated with MPA. Data represent the mean of three independent experiments for each cell type ± SEM. For b vs. a, and c vs. b: P <0.001. pA3 Luc, empty vector. MPA induces cyclin D1 expression at protein and mRNA levels via AP-1. Cells were transfected with TAM-67 and A-Fos vectors   and with c-Jun and c-Fos siRNAs   and then treated with MPA. Cyclin D1 protein expression was analyzed by WB.   Cyclin D1 mRNA expression levels were determined by RT-qPCR. The fold change of mRNA levels upon MPA treatment was calculated by normalizing the absolute levels of cyclin D1 mRNA to GAPDH levels, which was used as internal control, and setting the value of untreated cells as 1. Experiments shown were repeated three times with similar results. MPA, Medroxyprogesterone acetate.

Figure 4

    Protein recruitment to the cyclin D1 promoter was analyzed by ChIP in cells treated with MPA or pretreated with U0126 when indicated. Immunoprecipitated DNA was amplified by qPCR using primers flanking the TRE site. The arbitrary qPCR number obtained for each sample was normalized to the input, setting the value of the untreated sample as 1. Data are expressed as n-fold chromatin enrichment over untreated cells. For b vs. a and c vs. b: P <0.001.   Sequential ChIP chromatins from cells treated with MPA were first immunoprecipitated with c-Jun or c-Fos antibodies and were then re-immunoprecipitated using a PR antibody. qPCR and data analysis were performed as detailed in A. For b vs. a: P <0.001. Results in A and B are the mean ± SEM from three independent experiments. IgG was used as a negative control. MPA effects in T47D-Y-C587A-PR cells.   Protein recruitment to the cyclin D1 promoter was studied as described in  . For b vs. a: P <0.001.   Cyclin D1 promoter activation was detected as in Figure  3A and data shown represent the mean of three independent experiments ± SEM.   Cyclin D1 expression was studied by WB. This experiment was repeated three times with similar results. ChIP, chromatin immunoprecipitation; MPA, Medroxyprogesterone acetate; PR, Progesterone receptor; WB, Western blot.

Figure 5

  Cells were transfected with the indicated siRNAs or expression vectors and were then treated with MPA for 30 minutes. Recruitment of proteins to the cyclin D1 promoter was analyzed by ChIP. Immunoprecipitated DNA was amplified by qPCR using primers (red arrows) flanking the GAS and TRE sites indicated in the top panels. Amounts of immunoprecipitated DNA were normalized to inputs and reported relative to the amount obtained by IgG immunoprecipitation, which was set to one.   Sequential ChIP. Chromatins from cells treated with MPA as described in   were first immunoprecipitated with c-Jun or c-Fos antibodies and were then re-immunoprecipitated using an ErbB-2 antibody. The arbitrary qPCR number obtained for each sample was normalized to the input, setting the value of the untreated sample as 1. Data are expressed as fold chromatin enrichment over untreated cells. For b vs. a: P <0.001.   Recruitment of CBP and p300, and H3 and H4 acetylation levels (AcH3 and AcH4) at the sites described in   were studied by ChIP and data were also analyzed as in  . Results in A to C are the mean ± SEM from three independent experiments. For b vs. a: P <0.001. ChIP, chromatin immunoprecipitation; MPA, Medroxyprogesterone acetate.

Figure 6

  and   Cells transfected as indicated were treated for 48 (C4HD) or 24 (T47D) h with MPA. Incorporation of [3H]thymidine was measured. Data are presented as the mean ± SD, P <0.001 for b vs. a and c vs. b. Experiments shown are representative of three.   Cyclin D1 protein expression in C4HD cells was analyzed by WB.   AP-1 activity and ErbB-2 nuclear function cooperate to drive in vivo progestin-induced growth. Left, cells (106) from each group were inoculated s.c. in mice treated with MPA and tumor volume was calculated as described in Methods. Each point represents tumor mean volume ± SEM. Right, decrease in tumor mass.   Tumor growth. aGrowth rates were calculated as the slopes of growth curves. Volume, percentage of growth inhibition and growth delay in tumors from the experimental groups with respect to tumors from control C4HD-p-Flag cells were calculated at Day 27. # vs. * and c vs. b for tumor volume and growth rate, P <0.001. d With respect to C4HD-p-Flag cells and f vs. e, P <0.001. g With respect to C4HD-p-Flag cells, P <0.001.   ChIP analysis. DNA-protein complexes were pulled down with the c-Jun antibody or with IgG and DNA was amplified by qPCR using primers indicated in Figure 5. Results are expressed as in Figure 5A and represent the average of three replicates ± SEM. For b vs. a, P <0.001. Shown is a representative sample of each tumor type.   Tumor lysates were analyzed by WB. C4HD cells growing in absence of MPA are shown as control: Shown are two representative samples of mice injected with the different experimental groups. See also Additional file 1: Figure 3. ChIP, chromatin immunoprecipitation; MPA, Medroxyprogesterone acetate; WB, Western blot.

Figure 7

  PR and p-c-Jun colocalization in tumor samples.   Nuclear p-c-Jun and PR levels were evaluated by IF and scored as described in Results. Protein colocalization was visualized as nuclear yellow dots, indicated by white arrows. Shown are examples of tumors showing 0 to +3 colocalization scores. Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue).   Kaplan-Meier survival analysis correlating levels of p-c-Jun and PR colocalization with overall patient survival. IF, Immunofluorescence; PR, progesterone receptor.

Figure 8

  Proliferation , c-Jun phosphorylation and cyclin D1 promoter activation were studied as described in Figures 1, 3 and 6.   c-Jun and PR recruitment to the cyclin D1promoter was analyzed by ChIP as in Figure 5. Data are expressed as n-fold chromatin enrichment over untreated cells. For b vs. a and c vs. b: P <0.001.   to   Tam effects in sensitive and resistant cells.   and   Cell variants were treated as shown and proliferation was studied as in Figure 6.   Protein levels were analyzed by WB. Signal intensities of PR-A and PR-B bands were analyzed by densitometry and normalized to β-tubulin. Densitometric analysis of PR-A and PR-B expression levels in HR and HR6 clones, relative to those in BT474 cells (set to 1), are shown in the right panel.   and   WB in BT474-HR   and BT474 cells   were performed with the indicated phospho-antibodies and filters were re-probed with the respective total antibody. Signal intensities of phospho-proteins were normalized to total protein bands. Significance of MPA and Tam effects on the regulation of protein phosphorylation was analyzed as described in Methods (P <0.001).   and   c-Jun, PR, and ER α recruitment to the cyclin D1 promoter was studied by ChIP. We set as 1 the value of the untreated sample for BT474-HR cells   and of the IgG for BT474  . For b vs. a and c vs. b: P <0.001.   Tam effects on cyclin D1 protein expression. WBs were performed as in Figure 3 using β tubulin as loading control. Experiments in   to   were repeated five times with similar results. See Additional file 1: Figures 4, 5 and 6. ChIP, chromatin immunoprecipitation; MPA, Medroxyprogesterone acetate; PR, Progesterone receptor; Tam, Tamoxifen WB, Western blot.

Figure 9

  Nuclear p-c-Jun and PR levels were evaluated by IF and scored as described in Results and shown in Figure 7A. Protein colocalization was visualized as nuclear yellow dots. Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue). IF, Immunofluorescence; PR, Progesterone receptor.

Figure 10

  PR, Progesterone receptor.

