Beyond Bar and Line Graphs: Time for a New Data Presentation Paradigm

Abstract

Figures in scientific publications are critically important because they often show the data supporting key findings. Our systematic review of research articles published in top physiology journals (n = 703) suggests that, as scientists, we urgently need to change our practices for presenting continuous data in small sample size studies. Papers rarely included scatterplots, box plots, and histograms that allow readers to critically evaluate continuous data. Most papers presented continuous data in bar and line graphs. This is problematic, as many different data distributions can lead to the same bar or line graph. The full data may suggest different conclusions from the summary statistics. We recommend training investigators in data presentation, encouraging a more complete presentation of data, and changing journal editorial policies. Investigators can quickly make univariate scatterplots for small sample size studies using our Excel templates.

Introduction

Data presentation is the foundation of our collective scientific knowledge, as readers’ understanding of a dataset is generally limited to what the authors present in their publications. Figures are critically important because they often show the data that support key findings. However, studies of the Journal of the American Medical Association [1] and the British Medical Journal [2] provide compelling evidence that fundamental changes in the types of figures that scientists use are needed. Authors generally use figures to present summary statistics, instead of providing detailed information about the distribution of the data or showing the full data [1,2].

Bar graphs are designed for categorical variables; yet they are commonly used to present continuous data in laboratory research, animal studies, and human studies with small sample sizes. Bar and line graphs of continuous data are “visual tables” that typically show the mean and standard error (SE) or standard deviation (SD). This is problematic for three reasons. First, many different data distributions can lead to the same bar or line graph (Fig 1 and Fig 2). The full data may suggest different conclusions from the summary statistics (Fig 1 and Fig 2). Second, additional problems arise when bar graphs are used to show paired or nonindependent data (Fig 2). Figures should ideally convey the design of the study. Bar graphs of paired data erroneously suggest that the groups being compared are independent and provide no information about whether changes are consistent across individuals (Panel A in Fig 2). Third, summarizing the data as mean and SE or SD often causes readers to wrongly infer that the data are normally distributed with no outliers. These statistics can distort data for small sample size studies, in which outliers are common and there is not enough data to assess the sample distribution.

In contrast, univariate scatterplots, box plots, and histograms allow readers to examine the data distribution. This approach enhances readers’ understanding of published data, while allowing readers to detect gross violations of any statistical assumptions. The increased flexibility of univariate scatterplots also allows authors to convey study design information. In small sample size studies, scatterplots can easily be modified to differentiate between datasets that include independent groups (Fig 1) and those that include paired or matched data (Fig 2).

We conducted a systematic review of standard practices for data presentation in scientific papers, contrasting the use of bar graphs versus figures that provide detailed information about the distribution of the data (scatterplots, box plots, and histograms). We focused on physiology because physiologists perform a wide range of studies, including human studies, animal studies, and in vitro laboratory experiments. We systematically reviewed all full-length, original research articles published in the top 25% of physiology journals between January 1 and March 31, 2014 (n = 703) to assess the types of figures that were used to present continuous outcome data (S1 Fig and Table A in S1 Text). We also abstracted information on sample size and statistical analysis procedures, as these factors may influence figure selection. Detailed methods and results are presented in the data supplement. Based on our findings, we recommend major changes to standard practices for presenting continuous data in small sample size studies. We hope that these recommendations will promote scientific discourse by giving readers the information needed to fully examine published data.

Are Your Figures Worth a Thousand Words?

In addition to showing data for key findings, figures are important because they give authors the opportunity to display a large amount of data very quickly. However, most figures provided little more information than a table (Panel A in S2 Fig and S1 Text). Bar graphs were the most commonly used figures for presenting continuous data. 85.6% of papers included at least one bar graph. Most of these papers used bar graphs that showed mean ± SE (77.6%, Panel B in S2 Fig), rather than mean ± SD (15.3%). Line graphs and point and error bar plots were also common (61.3% of articles, Panel A in S2 Fig), and most showed mean ± SE. Figures that provide detailed information about the distribution of the data were seldom used. 13.4% of articles included at least one univariate scatterplot, 5.3% included at least one box plot, and 8.0% included at least one histogram. The journals that we examined publish research conducted by investigators in many fields; therefore, it is likely that investigators in other disciplines follow similar practices. The overuse of bar graphs and other figures that do not provide information about the distribution of the data has also been documented in psychology [3] and medicine [1,4].

Our data show that most bar and line graphs present mean ± SE. Fig 3 illustrates that presenting the same data as mean ± SE, mean ± SD, or in a univariate scatterplot can leave the reader with very different impressions. While the scatterplot prompts the reader to critically evaluate the authors’ analysis and interpretation of the data, the bar graphs discourage the reader from thinking about these issues by masking distributional information. The question of whether investigators should report the SE or the SD has been extensively debated by biomedical scientists and statisticians [5,6]. We argue that figures for small sample size studies should show the full distribution of the data, rather than mean ± SE or mean ± SD. However, given that figures showing these summary statistics are ubiquitous in the biomedical literature, researchers should understand why the SE and SD can give such different visual impressions. The SD measures the variation in the sample, whereas the SE measures the accuracy of the mean. The SE is strongly dependent on sample size (SE = SD / √n)—as sample size increases, the uncertainty surrounding the value of the mean decreases. If two samples have the same SE, the one with the larger sample size will have the larger SD. Showing the SE rather than the SD magnifies the apparent visual differences between groups. This effect is exacerbated when the groups being compared have different sample sizes, which is common in physiology and in other disciplines.

The infrequent use of univariate scatterplots, boxplots, and histograms is a missed opportunity. The ability to independently evaluate the work of other scientists is a pillar of the scientific method. These figures facilitate this process by immediately conveying key information needed to understand the authors’ statistical analyses and interpretation of the data. This promotes critical thinking and discussion, enhances the readers’ understanding of the data, and makes the reader an active partner in the scientific process. In contrast, bar and line graphs are “visual tables” that transform the reader from an active participant into a passive consumer of statistical information. Without the opportunity for independent appraisal, the reader must rely on the authors’ statistical analyses and interpretation of the data.

Summary Statistics Are Only Meaningful When There Are Enough Data to Summarize

Sample size is an important consideration when designing figures and selecting statistical analysis procedures (Box 1) for continuous data. Our analysis shows that most studies had very small sample sizes (Panel C in S2 Fig). The minimum sample size for any group shown in a figure was four (median number of independent observations), with an interquartile range of three independent observations (25th percentile: n = 3, 75th percentile: n = 6). The maximum sample size for any group shown in a figure was ten, with an interquartile range of nine (25th percentile: n = 6, 75th percentile: n = 15). Univariate scatterplots would be the best choice for many of these small studies. The summary statistics shown in bar graphs, line graphs, and box plots are only meaningful when there are enough data to summarize. Histograms are difficult to interpret when there aren’t enough observations to clearly show the distribution of the data.

Recommendations for a New Data Presentation Paradigm

These results suggest that, as scientists, we urgently need to change our standard practices for presenting and analyzing continuous data in small sample size studies. We recommend three changes to resolve the problems identified in this systematic review.

Conclusions

Our systematic review identified several critical problems with the presentation of continuous data in small sample size studies. A coordinated effort among investigators, medical journals, and statistics instructors is recommended to address these problems. We created free Excel templates (S2 Text and S3 Text, https://www.ctspedia.org/do/view/CTSpedia/TemplateTesting) that will allow researchers to quickly make univariate scatterplots for independent data (with or without overlapping points) and nonindependent data. We hope that improved data presentation practices will enhance authors’, reviewers’, and readers’ understanding of published data by ensuring that publications include the information needed to critically evaluate continuous data in small sample size studies.

Supporting Information

This file contains the methods and results for the systematic review, including Table A in S1 Text, Table B in S1 Text, Table C in S1 Text and Table D in S1 Text. Table A in S1 Text: The number of articles examined by journal. Values are n, or n (% of articles reviewed that were eligible and included in the analysis). Journals are organized by 2012 impact factor. Articles that were not full length original research articles were excluded after screening (i.e. reviews, editorials, perspectives, commentaries, letters to the editor, short communications, etc.). Abbreviations: AJP, American Journal of Physiology; APS, American Physiological Society. *APS Journal. Table B in S1 Text: Most studies performed parametric analyses. Values are n (%). *n (%) of 493 articles which performed parametric analyses. The remaining articles did not specifically state whether these assumptions were tested. Table C in S1 Text: Relationship between journal affiliation and the use of bar graphs and univariate scatterplots. Abbreviations: APS, American Physiological Society. Seven of the top 20 physiology journals are published by the American Physiological Society (APS), which specifies that outcome data should be presented in figures rather than in tables whenever possible. Nonhuman studies did not include human participants, tissues, cells or cell lines. Human studies included human participants, tissues, cells or cell lines. Table D in S1 Text: Relationship between journal affiliation and the use of histograms and line graphs/point and error bars plots. Abbreviations: APS, American Physiological Society. Seven of the top 20 physiology journals are published by the American Physiological Society (APS), which specifies that outcome data should be presented in figures rather than in tables whenever possible.. (DOCX). Click here for additional data file. Use this template to create scatterplots for independent data in two to five groups. Independent data means that the variable of interest is measured one time in each subject, and subjects are not related to each other. If your data do not meet these criteria, see the spreadsheet for paired or nonindependent data.. (XLSX). Click here for additional data file. Use this template to create scatterplots for paired or matched data. Paired data are when you measure the variable of interest more than one time in each participant. Matched data are when participants in groups one and two are matched for important characteristics. If your data are independent, please see the template for independent data. The template will allow you to create scatterplots for one group with two conditions, or two groups with two conditions.. (XLS). Click here for additional data file. Use these instructions to create univariate scatterplots for independent data in one or more groups of subject using GraphPad PRISM 6.0. Independent data means that the variable of interest is measured one time in each participant or specimen and participants or specimens are not related to each other. If your data are paired or matched, please see the instructions for paired or matched data.. (PDF). Click here for additional data file. Use these instructions to create univariate scatterplots for paired or matched data (two or more conditions) in one group of participants or specimens using GraphPad PRISM 6.0. Paired data are when you measure the variable of interest more than one time in each participant. Matched data are when participants in group one and group two are matched for important characteristics. If your data are independent, please see the instructions for independent data.. (PDF). Click here for additional data file. Use these instructions to create scatterplots for paired data (two conditions) in two groups of participants or specimens using GraphPad PRISM 6.0. Paired data are when you measure the variable of interest more than one time in each participant. If your data are independent, please see the instructions for Independent data.. (PDF). Click here for additional data file. (TIF). Click here for additional data file. Panel a: Bar graphs and other figures that typically show mean and SE or mean and SD were strongly preferred to figures that provide detailed information about the distribution of the data (scatterplots, box plots, and histograms). Panel b: Most bar graphs show mean ± SE. Panel c: Box plots show the minimum and maximum sample sizes for any group presented in a figure. The box shows the median and interquartile range. Whiskers show the furthest point that is within 1.5 times the interquartile range. Note that a few very high outliers are not shown (n = 8 for minimum sample size; n = 7 for maximum sample size). The maximum values for minimum and maximum sample size per group were 593 and 2,192, respectively. Showing these outliers would make the box plots impossible to see. Seventeen studies were excluded from this analysis as sample size was not reported (n = 614). Panel d: The types of figures that are selected depend on the type of statistical analysis that is performed. We performed ordinal logistic regression, with analysis type and figure type both classified as ordinal variables. The distribution of figure types differed significantly between studies that performed only parametric analyses and studies that performed both parametric and nonparametric analyses (p < 0.001), and between studies that performed both types of analyses and studies that performed only nonparametric analyses (p < 0.001).. (TIF). Click here for additional data file. 

Fig 1

The full data may suggest different conclusions from the summary statistics. The means and SEs for the four example datasets shown in Panels B–E are all within 0.5 units of the means and SEs shown in the bar graph (Panel A). p-values were calculated in R (version 3.0.3) using an unpaired t-test, an unpaired t-test with Welch’s correction for unequal variances, or a Wilcoxon rank sum test. In Panel B, the distribution in both groups appears symmetric. Although the data suggest a small difference between groups, there is substantial overlap between groups. In Panel C, the apparent difference between groups is driven by an outlier. Panel D suggests a possible bimodal distribution. Additional data are needed to confirm that the distribution is bimodal and to determine whether this effect is explained by a covariate. In Panel E, the smaller range of values in group two may simply be due to the fact that there are only three observations. Additional data for group two would be needed to determine whether the groups are actually different.

Fig 2

The bar graph (mean ± SE) suggests that the groups are independent and provides no information about whether changes are consistent across individuals (Panel A). The scatterplots shown in the Panels B–D clearly demonstrate that the data are paired. Each scatterplot reveals very different patterns of change, even though the means and SEs differ by less than 0.3 units. The lower scatterplots showing the differences between measurements allow readers to quickly assess the direction, magnitude, and distribution of the changes. The solid lines show the median difference. In Panel B, values for every subject are higher in the second condition. In Panel C, there are no consistent differences between the two conditions. Panel D suggests that there may be distinct subgroups of “responders” and “nonresponders.”

Fig 3

While scatterplots prompt the reader to critically evaluate the statistical tests and the authors’ interpretation of the data, bar graphs discourage the reader from thinking about these issues. Placental endothelin 1 (EDN1) mRNA data for four different groups of participants is presented in bar graphs showing mean ± SE (Panel A), or mean ± SD (Panel B), and in a univariate scatterplot (Panel C). Panel A (mean ± SE) suggests that the second group has higher values than the remaining groups; however, Panel B (mean ± SD) reveals that there is considerable overlap between groups. Showing SE rather than SD magnifies the apparent visual differences between groups, and this is exacerbated by the fact that SE obscures any effect of unequal sample size. The scatterplot (Panel C) clearly shows that the sample sizes are small, group one has a much larger variance than the other groups, and there is an outlier in group three. These problems are not apparent in the bar graphs shown in Panels A and B.

