Amyloid β-Sheet Mimics that Antagonize Amyloid Aggregation and Reduce Amyloid Toxicity

Abstract

The amyloid protein aggregation associated with diseases such as Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, and type II diabetes (among many others), features a bewildering variety of β-sheet-rich structures in transition from native proteins to ordered oligomers and fibers. The variation in the amino acid sequences of the β-structures presents a challenge to developing a model system of β-sheets for the study of various amyloid aggregates. Here we introduce a family of robust β-sheet macrocycles that can serve as a platform to display a variety of heptapeptide sequences from different amyloid proteins. We have tailored these amyloid β-sheet mimics (ABSMs) to antagonize aggregation of various amyloid proteins, thereby reducing the toxicity of amyloid aggregates. We describe the structures and inhibitory properties of ABSMs containing amyloidogenic peptides from Aβ associated with Alzheimer’s disease, β -microglobulin associated with dialysis-related amyloidosis, α-synuclein associated with Parkinson’s disease, islet amyloid polypeptide associated with type II diabetes, human and yeast prion proteins, and Tau, which forms neurofibrillary tangles.

Introduction

Amyloid aggregation is associated with many intractable protein aggregation diseases, notably including Alzheimer’s disease, Huntington’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, type II diabetes, and prion diseases1–3. Amyloid fibrils with characteristic highly ordered cross-β structures are the ultimate products of amyloid aggregation. More than 30 proteins have been linked to amyloidogenesis and they exhibit enormous variations in sequences and polymorphic fibril structures1,4–6. Fibril formation of a given polypeptide, however, greatly depends on its specific residue order7,8. Crystallographic structures of amyloidlike fibrils formed by amyloidogenic peptide fragments suggest that the formation of highly-ordered parallel or antiparallel β-sheets and a steric-zipper interface between β-sheets are two essential elements for amyloid fibril formation9,10.

While amyloid fibrils are the most visible evidence of pathology, soluble oligomers are proving to be more important in amyloid toxicity11,12. Although increasing evidence shows that these transient, unstable structures are rich in β-sheets, their dynamic and polymorphic properties make amyloid oligomers difficult to study at the atomic level13–15. Additional tools are needed to study amyloid oligomers and aggregation and to shed light on controlling these processes.

β-Sheet mimics that can display amyloid β-strands provide a means to study amyloid oligomers and aggregation. We previously introduced 42-membered ring macrocyclic β-sheets containing pentapeptide fragments from amyloid-β peptide (Aβ) and tau protein (Tau) to mimic amyloidlike β-sheets and shed a light on the structures of transient amyloid oligomers16,17. We have also used these macrocyclic β-sheets to inhibit aggregation of the peptide Ac-VQIVYK-NH  (AcPHF6) derived from Tau to provide insights into the aggregation process18.

The development of a robust chemical model of β-sheets that can tolerate a variety of amino acid sequences has been challenging because amyloidogenic sequences vary enormously and because folding of β-sheet mimics largely depends on the amino acid sequence1,19. In this paper, we introduce a new class of β-sheet macrocycles that can tolerate a wide range of amino acid sequences from amyloid proteins and still fold into β-sheet structures. We call these macrocycles amyloid β-sheet mimics (ABSMs).

ABSM   is a 54-membered ring and comprises a heptapeptide β-strand (the upper strand), one Hao unit flanked by two dipeptides (the lower strand), and two δ-linked ornithine (δOrn) turns (Figure 1a). The “upper” β-strand of ABSM   incorporates different heptapeptide fragments from Aβ, Tau, yeast Sup35 prion protein (Sup35), human prion protein (hPrP), human β -microglobulin (hβ M), human α-synuclein (hαSyn), and human islet amyloid polypeptide (hIAPP). Hao is a tripeptide β-strand mimic that not only serves as a template for intramolecular hydrogen bonding but also minimizes the exposed hydrogen-bonding functionality of the “lower” strand20. This structural design of Hao helps prevent ABSMs   from aggregating in solution to form an infinite network of in-register β-sheets; instead, ABSMs   dimerize and then further self-assemble into oligomers. The “upper” and “lower” strands of ABSM   are connected by two δOrn β-turn mimics21.

We envisioned that ABSM   would fold well because it is conformationally constrained by cyclicity and has a Hao template to promote intramolecular hydrogen bonding and two δOrn β-turn mimics to promote turn formation. We also envisioned that four pairs of side chains (R –R , R –R , R –R , and R –R ) would provide stabilizing transannular interactions. We anticipated that the flexibility of the dipeptides flanking Hao in the “lower” strand would better accommodate the flatness of the Hao template and thus minimize the kinks in the β-strands that we had previously observed in the 42-membered ring macrocycles17.

We designed ABSMs   to display exposed heptapeptide β-strands so that these β-strands can recognize and bind their parent amyloid proteins (Figure 1b). We envisioned recognition between ABSMs   and their parent amyloid proteins to take place through the β-sheet interactions observed in amyloid aggregation.

Here, we present structural studies of these ABSMs   and describe their effect upon amyloid aggregation and toxicity.

Results

1. Design of Amyloid β-Sheet Mimics 1

To test the folding of ABSMs  , we selected 16 amyloidogenic heptapeptide β-strands from seven β-sheet-rich amyloid proteins for positions 1–7 in the “upper” strands (Table 1). ABSMs   contain heptapeptide sequences from two important hydrophobic and fibril-forming regions of Aβ associated with Alzheimer’s disease, residues 16–23 and 29–405, 22. ABSMs   and   contain native heptapeptide sequences, while ABSMs   and   are G33F and G37F mutants, in which the aromatic residue across from Hao promotes better folding16. ABSM   contains residues 7–13 from Sup35, which has been widely used as a model to study amyloid formation9. ABSM   contains residues 116–122 from hPrP, which is the infectious agent of prion diseases23. ABSM   contains residues 305–311 from Tau, which forms neurofibrillary tangles24. ABSM   contain residues 62–68 and 63–69 from hβ M associated with dialysis-related amyloidosis25. ABSMs   and   contain residues 69–75 and 75–81 from hαSyn associated with Parkinson’s disease26. ABSMs   and   contain residues 11–17 and 26–32 from hIAPP associated with type II diabetes27. We chose polar and hydrophobic residues at positions 8–11 in the “lower” strands of ABSMs   to promote solubility in water and to increase hydrophobic residues that favor β-sheet formation.

2. Synthesis of Amyloid β-Sheet Mimics 1

ABSMs   were prepared by synthesizing the corresponding protected linear peptides, followed by solution-phase cyclization and deprotection28. The protected linear peptide precursors were synthesized on 2-chlorotrityl chloride resin by conventional Fmoc-based solid-phase peptide synthesis. Macrocyclization was typically performed using HCTU and N,N-diisopropylethylamine in DMF at ca. 0.5 mM concentration. The ABSMs   were isolated in ca. 20–30% overall yield after HPLC purification and lyophilization. Each synthesis produces tens of milligrams of ABSMs   as fluffy white solids. (For details, see the Supplementary Information Text.)

3. X-Ray Crystallographic Studies of Amyloid β-Sheet Mimic 1r

X-ray crystallography of ABSM   validates the design of ABSMs   (Figure 2). ABSM   is a homologue of ABSM   in which the Tyr residue in the “lower” strand is replaced with 4-bromophenylalanine for crystallographic phase determination. ABSM   adopts a β-sheet structure in which the “upper” and “lower” strands are intramolecularly hydrogen-bonded to form eight hydrogen bonds (Figure 2a). The two δOrn residues of ABSM   fold into β-turn like conformations, Hao mimics a tripeptide β-strand, and the “upper” strand displays an exposed heptapeptide β-sheet edge.

ABSM   forms a dimer in the crystal lattice in which the two recognition β-strands come together in an antiparallel β-sheet fashion (Figure 2b). The β-strands of the dimerization interface are shifted out of register, forming only six hydrogen bonds instead of the eight that would form through in-register contact.

The dimers stack in the crystal lattice, with hydrophobic contacts between the layers of the stack. The Ile, Leu, and Val, at positions 3, 5, and 7 on the “top” face of the dimer pack together in one set of hydrophobic contacts “above” the dimer, while the Met and Phe at positions 6 and 9 on the “bottom” face of the dimer pack together in another set of hydrophobic contacts “below” the dimer (Figures 2c and 2d). The hydrophobic contacts between the dimer layers appear to be important in the crystallization and supramolecular assembly of ABSM   and may explain the formation of the out-of-register interface within the dimer.

4. 1H NMR Studies of Amyloid β-Sheet Mimics 1

1H NMR studies of ABSMs   in D O solution further validate the design of ABSMs   and establish that ABSMs   generally adopt folded β-sheet structures in solution. The 1H NMR spectra of ABSMs   show sharp, disperse resonances at submillimolar and low millimolar concentrations in D O solution, suggesting ABSMs   to be non-aggregating in water. Antiparallel β-sheets have close contacts between the α-protons of the non-hydrogen-bonded pairs of amino acids, which generally give strong interstrand NOE cross-peaks (NOEs). In ABSMs  , these close contacts should involve the α-protons of residues 2 and 10 (2–10) and residues 6 and 9 (6–9). There should also be homologous contacts involving the α-proton of residue 4 and H  of Hao (4-Hao ) and the α- and pro-S δ-protons of the δOrn turns (Orn  S). Table 1 illustrates these contacts.

All ABSMs, except  ,  , and  , exhibit most of these key NOEs (Table 1). ABSMs  – ,  ,  ,  , and   show strong 2–10, 6–9, 4-Hao , and Orn S NOEs and thus exhibit good folding. ABSM   shows strong Orn S and 2–10 NOEs and a weak 4-Hao  NOE and thus exhibits moderate folding. ABSMs  ,  , and   show only Orn S NOEs and thus exhibit weak folding. Although the lack of the interstrand NOEs indicates poor folding of ABSMs  ,  , and  , the Orn S NOEs suggest that their δOrn residues fold at least partially into a β-turn like conformation. Table 1 summarizes the observed key NOEs and the folding of ABSMs  .

5. Inhibition of Amyloid Aggregation by Amyloid β-Sheet Mimics 1

Thioflavin T (ThT) fluorescence assays and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) studies show that the ABSMs containing amyloidogenic sequences can inhibit aggregation of amyloid proteins. We studied inhibition of Aβ  and Aβ  aggregation by ABSM  , inhibition of hβ M aggregation by ABSM  , and inhibition of truncated human α-synuclein (hαSyn ) aggregation by ABSM  .

ThT fluorescence assays show that ABSMs  ,  , and   effectively delay aggregation of their parent proteins at sub-stoichiometric concentrations in a dose-dependent manner (Figures 3a–d). ABSM   delays Aβ  and Aβ  aggregation by 280% and 350% respectively at 0.2 equivalents and by 430% and 600% at 0.5 equivalents (Figures 3a and 3b). Although ThT fluorescence assays show that Aβ aggregation exhibits comparable lag times at 0.5 and 1.0 equivalents of ABSM  , the growth phases of the aggregation are much slower at 1.0 equivalent than at 0.5 equivalents. (* in Figures 3a and 3b. For details, see Figures S1 and S2.) ABSM   delays hβ M aggregation by 160% at 0.2 and 0.5 equivalents and by 340% at 1.0 equivalent (Figure 3c). ABSM   delays hαSyn  aggregation by 150% at 0.2 equivalents (Figure 3d). Although hαSyn  aggregation exhibits longer lag times with 0.5 and 1.0 equivalents of ABSM   than with 0.2 equivalents, some runs showed complete suppression of aggregation, while other runs showed typical sigmoidal curves. Because of this scatter in the data, the precise lag times are not reported. (* in Figure 3d. For details, see Figure S4.) TEM studies of samples taken directly from the ThT assays show that Aβ, hβ M, and hαSyn  form fibrils without ABSMs and do not form fibrils with ABSMs (1.0 equivalent) during the delayed lag time (Figures 3eh).

Aβ has been shown to cross-interact with different amyloidogenic proteins containing similar primary sequences29–31. To investigate cross-interaction of Aβ with ABSMs, we compared the interaction of Aβ with ABSM   to that with ABSM  , which has a closely homologous sequence, and to that with ABSM  , which does not (Figure S5). ThT fluorescence assays show that ABSM   inhibits Aβ aggregation, like ABSM  , while ABSM   has little or no inhibitory effect (Figure S5). This result suggests that structurally homologous ABSMs can not only interact with their parent amyloid proteins but can also cross interact with different amyloid proteins.

To further investigate the effect of sequence on inhibition, we compared the interaction of ABSM   with Aβ  to that of ABSMs 1b,  ,  , and   with Aβ . ThT fluorescence assays show that ABSM   is effective against Aβ  aggregation, while ABSMs  ,  , and   cause little or no inhibition (Figure S6). The inhibition of Aβ  aggregation by both ABSMs   and   indicates that the central hydrophobic sequence Aβ  is critical to the activity of ABSMs against Aβ  aggregation. This result supports the role of Aβ    in Aβ aggregation and suggests that strong interaction of this sequence in these ABSMs with that of the Aβ oligomers delays Aβ aggregation22, 32.

6. Detoxification of Aβ by Amyloid β-Sheet Mimic 1a

Cell viability (MTT) assays establish that ABSM   reduces the toxicity of Aβ  and Aβ  in PC-12 cells (Figure 4) and that ABSMs  ,  , and   exhibit little or no toxicity (Figure S9). We examined the effect of ABSM   on the toxicity of Aβ  and Aβ , because ABSM   exhibits the best inhibitory activity among those studied. We first incubated Aβ monomers (5μM) without ABSM   to allow Aβ oligomers and fibrils to form. The resulting Aβ mixtures were directly used in cell viability assays. These assays show that the Aβ  and Aβ  preincubated without ABSM   kills 42% and 46% of the PC-12 cells respectively, relative to controls in which the cells are incubated in only PBS buffer solutions (Figure 4).

Cell viability assays further establish that preincubation of Aβ with ABSM   rescues the cells in a dose-dependent manner. Preincubation of Aβ  and Aβ  with 0.2 equivalents of ABSM   reduces the death of PC-12 to 29% and 38% respectively, while preincubation with 1.0 equivalent reduces cell death to 27% and 30% and preincubation with 5 equivalents reduces cell death to 14% and 6%. The rescue of these neuron like cells by ABSM   suggests that ABSMs may reduce the production of toxic amyloid oligomers or bind the oligomers and reduce their toxicity.

Discussion

Amyloid β-sheet mimics   provide a unique tool with which to elucidate the process of amyloid aggregation. Although many of the details of amyloid aggregation still remain unclear, nucleation-dependent polymerization, in which seeding to form a β-structured nucleus is the rate-determining step, is widely accepted1, 22. Based on the nucleation-dependent polymerization, we propose a model for the potent inhibition of Aβ aggregation by ABSM  . In this model, ABSM   binds early β-structured oligomers and blocks Aβ nucleation (Figure 5a). Without ABSM  , the unstructured monomer forms β-structured oligomers which, in the rate-determining step, go on to form a β-structured nucleus that ultimately assembles to form cross-β fibrils. The solid line in Figure 5a illustrates this pathway. ABSM   creates a new aggregation pathway for the early β-structured oligomers. In this pathway, ABSM   binds the β-structured oligomers to form Aβ-oligomer-ABSM-  complexes and blocks the Aβ oligomer-to-nucleus transition. The dashed line in Figure 5a illustrates this pathway.

It is significant that ABSM   substantially delays the aggregation of Aβ at sub-stoichiometric concentrations (as low as 1 μM), e.g. 0.05 equivalents of ABSM   per equivalent of Aβ (Figure S2), while simple linear peptide fragments derived from Aβ generally show substantial inhibitory effects at stoichiometric or greater concentrations33,34. This observation suggests that ABSM   binds a larger oligomer, not the monomer or a smaller oligomer, such as a dimer, trimer, or tetramer. ABSM   binds the early β-structured oligomers more strongly than the unstructured monomers bind oligomers, because the recognition β-strand of ABSM   is preorganized. This preorganization thus promotes formation of Aβ-oligomer-ABSM-  complexes. The complexation may occur through edge-to-edge interactions between the hydrogen-bonding edge of ABSM   and exposed hydrogen-bonding groups of the Aβ oligomers and through face-to-face hydrophobic interactions between ABSM   and the hydrophobic surfaces of the Aβ oligomers. These types of interactions should take place between the hydrophobic sequence Aβ  of ABSM   and that of the Aβ oligomers, as observed in the amyloid-related oligomers containing the pentapeptide sequence LVFFA shown in Figure 5b and the amyloidlike fibrils from the hexapeptide KLVFFA shown in Figure 5c. Similar interactions should also occur in the interactions of other ABSMs with their parent amyloidogenic peptides and proteins. The stabilization of these complexes creates a higher energy barrier to formation of the β-structured nucleus and thus delays or halts fibril formation. Because ABSM   cannot sequester all of the equilibrating Aβ oligomers, the Aβ monomers and oligomers eventually succumb to thermodynamics and form Aβ fibrils.

The X-ray crystallographic structure of ABSM   may provide insights not only into the stabilization of the dimerization and higher-order supramolecular assembly of ABSMs, but also into the stabilization and structure of intermediates formed during amyloid aggregation. The hydrophobic contacts formed by the Ile, Leu, and Val, at positions 3, 5, and 7 of ABSM   are akin to the steric zipper of amyloidlike fibrils formed by fragments Aβ , Aβ , Aβ , and Aβ 10, 35. Both the layered crystal structure of ABSM   and the amyloidlike fibrils are stabilized by hydrophobic contacts. These observations suggest that maximization of both hydrophobic contact and hydrogen bonding is key to stabilizing not only amyloid fibrils but also transient amyloid oligomers36.

Conclusion

The amyloid β-sheet mimics   described herein provide a single platform with which to display a variety of amyloidogenic heptapeptide β-strands and provide a rational design for inhibitors to control amyloid aggregation. X-ray crystallographic and 1H NMR studies validate that the design of ABSMs  , including the cyclicity, Hao template, two δOrn β-turn mimics, and paired side chains, promotes the formation of β-sheets in which the folding is largely independent of the amino acid sequence.

ABSMs   can be tailored to inhibit aggregation of different amyloid proteins. The inhibition of Aβ, hβ M, and hαSyn  aggregation by ABSMs   indicates that ABSMs containing one hydrogen-bonding edge and one blocking edge are an effective design for inhibitors of amyloid aggregation. The ability of ABSMs  ,  , and   to inhibit amyloid aggregation and to detoxify amyloid aggregates suggests the potential for therapeutic applications in amyloid-related diseases.

Materials and Methods

Synthetic Aβ  was purchased from GL Biochem (Shanghai) Ltd. Aβ , hβ M, and hαSyn  were expressed in E. coli. (For details, see the Supplementary Information Text.) ABSMs   were synthesized as described above. (For details, see the Supplementary Information Text.) 1H NMR, 2D TOCSY, and 2D ROESY experiments of ABSMs   were performed in D O with DSA as an internal standard at 500 MHz at 298 K. (For details, see the Supplementary Information Text.) Crystallization, data collection, and structure determination of ABSM   are described in the Supplementary Information Text. ThT fluorescence assays and TEM studies of Aβ, hβ M, and hαSyn  aggregation with ABSMs  ,  , and   are described in the Supplementary Information Text. Cell viability assays to establish the toxicity of ABSMs  ,  , and   toward HeLa, HEK-293, and PC-12 cells are described in the Supplementary Information Text.

Supplementary Material

     

Figure 1

Design of amyloid β-sheet mimic  . (a) Representation of ABSM   illustrating the upper β-strand (recognition β-strand), the δ-linked ornithine (δOrn) turn unit, and the Hao amino acid blocker unit. (b) Representation of ABSM   recognizing and blocking amyloid aggregation through β-sheet interactions.

Figure 2

X-ray crystallographic structure of ABSM  , which contains the heptapeptide sequence AIIGLMV (Aβ ). (a) The monomer. (b) The dimer: top view. (c) The dimer: side view. (d) Stacked layers of dimer in the crystal lattice. Note that the view in b is perpendicular to the β-sheet (top view), whereas the view in c and d is 90° away, parallel to the β-sheet (side view) and shows the hydrophobic contacts. Some side chains in c and d have been omitted for clarity.

Figure 3

Effect of ABSMs on inhibition of Aβ , Aβ , hβ M, and hαSyn  aggregation monitored by thioflavin T fluorescence assays and transmission electron microscopy. (a) Lag time of Aβ  (20 μM) aggregation in the absence and presence of ABSM  . (b) Lag time of Aβ  (20 μM) aggregation in the absence and presence of ABSM  . (c) Lag time of hβ M (30μM) aggregation in the absence and presence of ABSM  . (d) Lag time of hαSyn  (50μM) aggregation in the absence and presence of ABSM  . (e) TEM of Aβ  (20 μM) after incubation for 6 h without ABSM   (top) and incubation for 6 h with 1.0 equivalent of ABSM   (bottom). (f) TEM of Aβ  (20 μM) after incubation for 7 h without ABSM   (top) and incubation for 7 h with 1.0 equivalent of ABSM   (bottom). (g) TEM of hβ M (30 μM) after incubation for 2 h without ABSM   (top) and incubation for 2 h with 1.0 equivalent of ABSM   (bottom). (h) TEM of hαSyn  (50 μM) after incubation for 72 h without ABSM   (top) and incubation for 72 h with 1.0 equivalent of ABSM   (bottom). * For explanation, see the text and Figures S1, S2, and S4. Error bars correspond to standard deviation of four or greater sets of experiments. For experimental details, see the Supplementary Information Text.

Figure 4

Effect of ABSM   on Aβ  and Aβ  toxicity toward PC-12 cells. Addition of Aβ decreases cell survival when PC-12 cells are cultured for 24 h with preincubated Aβ. Cell survival increases when cells are cultured for 24 h with a preincubated mixture of ABSM   and Aβ in 0.2, 1.0, and 5 molar ratios. Cell survival is given as a percentage relative to controls in which only phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) is added. The cell survival of the PBS controls is taken to be 100%. Error bars correspond to standard deviation of four sets of experiments. For experimental details, see the Supplementary Information Text.

Figure 5

β-Sheet interactions of Aβ peptides and ABSM  . (a) Proposed model of inhibition of Aβ aggregation by ABSM  . The solid curve corresponds to a pathway in which Aβ aggregates without ABSM  . The dashed curve corresponds to an alternative pathway in which ABSM   inhibits Aβ aggregation by binding Aβ oligomers. (b) Crystal structure of a macrocyclic peptide containing pentapeptide sequence LVFFA17. (PDB ID: 3Q9H) The magenta and green structures correspond to parallel and antiparallel β-sheet dimers formed by the macrocyclic peptide. The side view shows hydrophobic contacts formed between the parallel and antiparallel β-sheet dimers. (c) Crystal structure of the linear peptide KLVFFA35. (PDB ID: 3OW9) The orange and purple structures correspond to different layers within the crystal structure. The side view shows hydrophobic contacts between the layers.

